Title: 2022 - Utilizing Machine Learning to Gain Geological Insights through Unstructured Data for  Sustainable Exploration Activities
Author: Iraya Energies
Tags: Machine Learning, Data Aanalysiis, Unstructured Data, Exploration

Utilizing Machine Learning to Gain Geological Insights through Unstructured Data for
Sustainable Exploration Activities — Case Study Pre-Salt Brazil

Introduction

Understanding the basin regional trends and identifying the anomalies is a crucial background research
during basin exploration activities. One way to gain a sound knowledge about the geology and the
exploration history is to analyse the vast amount of data accumulated over the years in an unstructured
manner. A sustainable data driven strategy leveraging on the latest advancement of Machine Learning
(ML) and Analytics is applied on vast amount of unstructured data. By highlighting the data driven
strategy, the paper demonstrates such a strategy applied to pre-salt carbonates prospects located in the
Campos and Santos Basins, offshore Brazil. The interpretation framework consists of first step, to
identify the regional first order trends and second step, to recognize the second order anomalies over
the full area providing a holistic picture of the area of interest.

Methodology

The unstructured data comprise of more than 48,000 documents, primarily in Portuguese language, for
a total of 330,000 pages related to 50 years of exploration, covering the Campos and Santos Basins. The
methodologies are divided into two parts. In the part one methodology, the unstructured data is
processed using machine learning techniques such as Natural Language Processing (NLP) for name
entity recognition and language translation, and Deep Convolutional Neural Network (DCNN) for auto-
image recognition (Hernandez et al., 2019). In part two methodology, ML Analytics leverages the
visualization for data relationships to give a holistic view of the whole corpus (Baillard et al., 2021).
Three steps study is used here, as explained below with illustration at Figure 1.
© Step 1: Deep Search through text is the ability to use keywords search within the whole corpus
and filter the wanted results. Filtered information is easily accessible for investigation. Deep
Search is also applied for images. DCNN image recognition and classification techniques classify
the images into eight categories: thin section, core, well plot, seismic, stratigraphic structural
elements, map, table, and figure. A deep search allows user to search information tagged and
identified in these images. This step is to identify the geological and exploration challenges
related to the area of interest.
Step 2: Heat Map highlights the “hot zones” on map based on the frequency of the keywords
found. Drawing a polygon on the map allows user to confine the search to focus only in the zone
of their interest. On the other hand, instant text search through the whole corpus of English and
Portuguese documents is possible with the automated translation. Users able to search through
Portuguese documents using English keywords.
Step 3: Contextual Knowledge Graph illustrates the connectivity of ‘related corpuses’ based on
well name referencing. This is useful to obtain related information from different wells
(Hernandez et al., 2019). Besides that, Intuition provides clustered images view, a great approach
to discover analogues for alike images such as thin section, core, SEM, and biomarker.

« Deep Search within documents and * Information correlation using
export CSV Knowledge Graph

—
/ Deep Search through images and
retrieve * Autometed translation of Portuguese * Analogs ieentfication using
: to English, to be able ta combine Image Clustering

m
— information irom to languages

2 py

Figure I The data driven search strategy implementing the ML Analytics for visualization of data
relationships for a holistic view of whole corpus

GE Conference on D: 1 Innovat

for a Sustainable Future


Case study: Understanding the Pre-Salt Carbonate Regional Trends and Anomalies in Campos
and Santos Basins

The Campos and Santos Basins, located to the east offshore of Brazil, are some of the most prolific oil
and gas basins in the world with significant discoveries such as Tupi, Jupiter and Libra Fields. The
investigation of the 50 years of pre-salt exploration history contained in the 48,000 documents processed
revealed that most of the challenges during exploration are caused by 1. Fluid distribution 2. The
reservoir quality 3. CO2 and H2S presence 4. Overpressure patterns,

1. Campos and Santos Basins are showing a variable fluid distribution. The type and quality of
the fluid trends are keys to define the best target for a sustainable development.

2. The diagenesis affects the reservoir quality. A good visualization of the lateral distribution of
such process allows a better estimation of the porosity and the volume in place.
The regional gas issues, such as understanding the presence of CO2 and H2S is essential to
gauge the reservoir diagenesis properties as well as to plan for production facilities or to avoid
regions of sour and hazardous gaseous.
The irregularity in the thickness of the salt layer causes variability in the pressure regime with
overpressure over the zone of interest and affecting the drilling campaigns.

These challenges are relevant to understand the geology and production issues encountered in distinct
parts of the basins to improve sustainable in the exploration risk and reducing CO? footprint.

For the pre-salt oil trendings, Campos pre-salt generally has lighter oil compared to Santos pre-salt. As
for the anomalies, light oil or condensate discovery at Pau De Acucar, Seat and Gavea Fields in Campos
pre-salt, while heavy mostly found in the post-salt in the Southern Campos. In Santos, heavy oil reported
in Jupiter Field. Note that heavy oil also discovered in Atlanta and Oliva Fields at post-salt. Illustration
in Figure 2.

«Guarulhos

Mediuni dil
AP average
0

Figure 2 Heat map highlights the wells with “heavy oil” information. The oil API delineation is based
on Deep Search extraction from test reports for Santos (left map) and Campos (right map). Knowledge
Graph was analyzed to find a group of fields that share the light oil information — Gavea, Seat and Pao
de Acucar Fields.

Next, we study the facies distribution at pre-salt carbonate. A collection of core and thin section images
are retrieved from the Deep Search through images. In general, it is observed that the reservoir
formation is in the shrub facies, microbiolites and coquina. For the trendingss, the area with COQo,
leaching activities enhance the porosity, example in the Libra, Buzios Fields, going south to Tupi and
Carcara Fields in Santos. Fields proximal to the shore has poorer reservoir quality. One of the anomalies
observed is the hydrothermal activity can destroy the enhanced porosity by the leaching. The
hydrothermal activity is anticipated in Field Albacora, Carcara, based on the observation on the core.
Illustration in Figure 3.

GE Conference on D: for a Sustainable Future


MERO/LIBRA.

Microbial carbonates in
sag sequence and coquina
rift sequence

ITARPU
Shrub facies’ss.
-cuaruitos
MEXILHAO-
Poor
reservoir
quality

BUZIGS, ATAPU,SEPIA
bial carbonates in

sag sequence and

coquina rift sequence

) frame
Figure 3 Pre-salt carbonate facies distribution based on core and thin sections collection from Deep
Search through images. Analysing the diagenesis trend has an impact on reservoir quality
interpretation. (core and thin section images are taken from BDEP-ANP reports and Core Lab study)

The following study is to investigate the regional gas issues. The trend is showing that Santos is
suffering higher CO2 contamination compared to Campos, especially in the center deep-water Santos
area. Jupiter Field suffers from very high concentration of CO2 gas, 79% recorded. Center deeper-water
Santos is suffering from CO2 contamination potentially near to the mantel magmatic activities
intercepted by deep-seated fault (Luca et al., 2017). Hazardous H2S gas presence in high amount
(exceeding OSHA safe limit 50 ppm) in the Buzios, Iara Fields of Santos and Xerelete, Albacora Fields
of Campos. Illustration in Figure 4.

eGuaruihos
Séo Paulo”

Santg

, ‘BACALFAU
BEM TE VI
ABERE
OESTE
CO, 15%
Figure 4 Heat Map of “high CO2” information with delineation of CO2 concentration based on Deep

Search extraction from test reports in Santos (left map) and Campos (right map)

Lastly, is the study of formation pressure pattern. The formation data points are quickly extracted from
unstructured data over 80 wells using Deep Search. The points are then plotted on gradient psi/ft ranging
from 0.35 to 0.7 psi/ft. Based on the pressure gradient validation, wells in Carcara, Sagitario and
Corcovado Fields have exceptionally high formation pressure. An interpretation of fullstack PSDM
cross-section shows thick salt area in Carcara and Sagitario, possible with faulting causes saline water
intrusion which contribute to high pressure zone. Irregularity in thickness of salt layer causes variability
in pressure regime, such as overpressure area to take note as this will have an impact on seismic
interpretation and drilling campaign. Illustration in Figure 5.

EAGE Conference on Digital Innovation for a Sustainable Future


Formation Pressure, psi
10000 15000

Figure 5 Formation pressure extraction for over 80 wells (all data points taken from BDEP-ANP
reports). Exceptionally high pressure recorded in Guaratiba Group in Carcara, Sagitario and
Corcovado, possible due to high salt thickness and faulting causes saline water. Fullstack PSDM cross
section shows thick salt in area of Carcara and Sagitario (courtesy of Kattah et al., 2014).

Conclusion

The research shows the effectiveness of using ML/AI technologies and Analytics to mine through the
vast amount of unstructured data and gain insights related to the regional trends and anomalies of
important geological, reservoir and production parameters to minimize the risk of exploration and
reduce carbon footprint. New tools in ML/AI and Analytics provides a new exploration frontier for
subsurface experts allowing them to interrogate and visualize a vast amount of data previously scattered
in different format and location holistically.

Acknowledgement

We would like to thank PETRONAS Petroleo Brasil LTDA for the collaboration with Iraya Energies
to makes this paper possible. Our gratitude appreciation also goes to Banco de Dadoes Exploracao e
Producao (BDEP) of National Agency of Petroleum (ANP) for making the data source available for
this study.

References

Baillard, F., & Hernandez, N. (2021). A Case Study of Understand Bonarparte Basin using Unstructured
Data Analysis with Machine Learning Techniques. EAGE Annual.

Hernandez, M., & Baillard, F. (2019). An effective G&G exploration strategy inspired by a wolfpack.
Force workshop.

Hernandez, N., Lucafias, P., Graciosa, J, Mamador, C., & Panganiban, I. (2019). Automated
Information Retrieval from Unstructured Documents Utilizing a Sequence of Smart Machine Learning.
EAGE Workshop on Big Data and Machine Learning for E&P Efficiency 25 - 27 February.

Hydrogen Sulfide. (2022). Retrieved from Occupational Safety and Health Administration:
https://www.osha.gov/hydrogen-sulfide/hazards

Core Lab [2022]. Pre-Salt Reservoirs of the Santos and Campos Basins, Brazil

Luca, Pedro & Matias, Hugo & Carballo, Jose & Sineva, Diana & Pimentel, Gustavo & Tritlla, Jordi &
Cerda, Mateu & Loma, Rubén & Jiménez, Ricardo & Pontet, Matthieu & Martinez, Pedro & Vega,
Victor. [2017]. Breaking Barriers and Paradigms in Presalt

Kattah, S., Balabekov, Y., [2014]. New opportunities evident in the Santos Basin. Hartenergy. 2
September 2022. https://www.hartenergy.com/ep/exclusives/new-opportunities-evident-santos-basin-
174870

EAGE Conference on Digital Innovation for a Sustainable Future

