Title: 2023 - CO2 emissions the elephant in the room – A pathway of reduction using digitalization and unstructured data
Author: Iraya Energies
Tags: CLimate Change, Unstructured Data, Digitalization, Data Mining

VIENNA | AUSTRIA

CO, emissions the elephant in the room: a pathway of reduction using digitalization and
unstructured data

Introduction

In this paper, we are exploring the challenges associated to climate change in the energy industry with
the paradigm of extracting oil and gas in a low CO, environment to limit the effect of climate change
and provide the world with affordable source of energy for mobility and heat generation.

We will be discussing how carbon accounting allows to track direct and indirect source of emissions,
its origins and the challenges associated to them.

Finally, we will investigate how modern technology such as data mining can help mitigate direct and
indirect emissions by increasing operations efficiency, identifying operation flaws, and implementing
scalable Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) implementation.

CO) emission and world energy consumption

Recently, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) issued the sixth Assessment Report
(AR6) related to Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability which highlights
the urgency of limiting the increase of temperature to 1.5°C to reduce the impact of climate change:
“Global warming, reaching 1.5°C in the near-term, would cause unavoidable increases in multiple
climate hazards and present multiple risks to ecosystems and humans (very high confidence). [...] Near-
term actions that limit global warming to close to 1.5°C would substantially reduce projected losses
and damages related to climate change in human systems and ecosystems, compared to higher warming
levels, but cannot eliminate them all (very high confidence).” (IPCC, 2022).

In addition, the AR6 report linked to Climate Change 2022: Mitigation of Climate Change suggests
that “All global modelled pathways that limit warming to 1.5°C [...] involve rapid and deep and in
most cases immediate GHG emission reductions in all sectors. Modelled mitigation strategies to
achieve these reductions include transitioning from fossil fuels without CCS to very low- or zero-carbon
energy sources, such as renewables or fossil fuels with CCS, demand side measures and improving
efficiency, reducing non-CQ emissions” (IPCC, 2022).

Global primary energy consumption by source
Primary energy is calculated based on the ‘substitution method’ which takes account of the inefficiencies in fossil

fuel production by converting non-fossil energy into the energy inputs required if they had the same conversion

losses as fossil fuels.

Other

enewables
160,000 TWh fodern biofuels

140,000 TWh 7 Hydropower
— Nuclear
7 Gas
120,000 TWh

100,000 TWh
80,000 TWh
60,000 TWh
40,000 TWh

20,000 TWh

__ Traditional

OTWh biomass
1800 1850 1900 2019

‘Source: Vaclav Smil (2017) & BP Statistical Review of World Energy OurWorldinData.org/energy «CC BY



VIENNA | AUSTRIA

Figure 1: Global primary energy consumption by source. Fossil energies account for 80% respectively
Coal (25%), Oil (32%) and Gas (23%) (Source: Our World in Data - Energy)

While limiting the reduction of CO2 to reduce the impact of climate change, the world is still highly
dependent on fossil fuels, with fossil energies accounting in 2019 for more than 80% in total and Oil/Gas
for 60% alone (Figure 1). Combined with the need of powering the world and the challenges of climate
change, the energy sector has a central play to significantly monitor and reduce its CO2 footprint.

Carbon accounting

Carbon accounting is the process which allows organization to quantify and monitor Greenhouse Gas
(GHG) emissions, By construction, carbon accounting counts the direct and indirect emissions linked
to the activity of the organization through the full value chain.

Direct emission are the emissions directly related to the own activity of the company such as oil/gas
extraction and production and are often referred to scope 1 emissions. Indirect emission are the
emissions emitted considering the full value chain. In the case of the energy industry, this would
consider all the necessary services contracted to perform the extraction of oil and gas from the
subsurface and all the emissions related to the usage of the oil and gas as a molecule for the human
usage in mobility, industry usage and heat generation. These emissions are falling into the scope 2
associated to the supply of energy (input) and the scope 3 linked to the oil and gas products sold (output).

Figure 2 illustrates the breakdowns and evolution of four (4) representative Oil jor operators’
emissions until 2018. In average, 10% of the emissions are associated to direct emission and 90% of
them are linked to indirect emissions connected to hydrocarbon products sold. Considering oil and gas
commitment in reducing carbon emission, this means that both direct and indirect emissions would need
to be tackled simultaneously.

Oil Majors' Carbon emissions

Wats ee ce peeaes se rsa betas
Operator A Operator B
Scope |

Seopel

Scope

Operator C Operator D

Figure 2: Evolution of direct and indirect emissions for four (4) Oil Majors. scope 1; Own operations
(direct emissions), scope 2: Power supply (indirect emissions), scope 3: Indirect from oil and gas
products sold (indirect emissions) (Source: Modified from Reuters 2019)

Data mining technology



VIENNA | AUSTRIA

Decades of oil and gas operations associated to the exploration, development and production of oil
fields have generated vast amount of data which provides a deep insight of constant optimization of
costs and resources. The data are interpreted and compiled into unstructured data such as reports,
presentations and studies providing a carbon copy of the history of the operations. The unstructured
data provides an immense potential of CO2 emissions reduction for both direct and indirect emissions.
New technology such as Data Mining and Machine Learning technology helps to process and retrieve
information at scale contained in the unstructured data in a pipeline called ingestion of unstructured
data (Hernandez, 2019). The process involves automated pipeline of text identification, image
classification, Name Entity Recognition (NER), Knowledge Graph and Heat Map analysis.

For the direct emissions, the ingestion of unstructured data gives the G&G experts a discovery
experience allowing him to interrogate the full corpus of data instantly. Such ingestion platform reduces
the time of information retrieval and provides a holistic view of the lateral extent for the parameters of
interest. An example of such application is seen in Figure 3, where reservoir intervals with high CO2
content is highlighted for more than 500 wells associated to the ingestion of over 45,000 unstructured
documents.

Results Density

Low mug High
— Main deep faut mes fgnoous rocks (Ranta, 2020)
> Taatane Gough fa (Matos, 2027) Crustal Domains (Zaién etal, 2018) MD Extrusions (Costa Comela, 2018}
 Post-sat wel Ml Hyper Extended Crust (Wb btusions (Costa Comeia, 2019)
© Pre-tak wal 1 Btrached Tinned IB Iproous cock (Vier do Luc of a, 2017]
Depocenter 7 Resistate

Figure 3: Regional maps covering 500 wells showing the presence of high CO: content in the reservoir
interval (Source: https://doi.org/10.1016/) jsames.2022, 103760)

Reducing the time of information retrieval provides a unique opportunity of fast-tracking studies, hence
reduce the CO2 emissions. An extended scope of the data ingestion workflow is the identifying and
tracking the origin of operations flaws and best practices for potential improvement and reduction of
CO» emissions (Hernandez, 2021).

The reduction of indirect emissions involves large scale adoption and deployment of CCS capabilities
worldwide. Such a pathway is possible by leveraging on current existing oil and gas assets which are
the mature depleting fields. Extensive work and studies over decades generated a vast amount of data
subsurface studies and production that are mined to rank the best opportunities for CCS based on the
field maturation, intervention history and geological settings. Once the target reservoir identified CO2
injection can then be monitored wit novel environmentally friendly methods such as using
nondisruptive 4D seismic (Figure 4) to prove the potential. Such Data to Sink funnel provides the
technical scalability and the cost effectiveness to assess CCS potential in a large area of interest.



VIENNA | AUSTRIA

Data mining of historical
unstructured data from 100% data sweep of
depleting mature oil and mature fields

gas fields -
a

Data consolidation
of existing G&G
structured data

20% opportunities
identified

CO2 injection
and
monitoring

CCS operation

Figure 4: Data to Sink funnel workflow powered by data mining, machine learning and lean 4D seismic
monitoring.

Conclusions

The reduction of carbon emission at scale in the energy industry remains a challenge. In this paper we
have demonstrated how digitalization applied on unstructured data can help reduce both direct and
indirect emissions.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Iraya Energies for allowing us to publish this paper.

References

IPCC, 2022: Summary for Policymakers. In: Climate Change 2022: Mitigation of Climate Change.
Contribution of Working Group III to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change [P.R. Shukla, J. Skea, R. Slade, A. Al Khourdajie, R. van Diemen, D. McCollum, M.
Pathak, S. Some, P. Vyas, R. Fradera, M. Belkacemi, A. Hasija, G. Lisboa, S. Luz, J. Malley, (eds.)].
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA. doi:
10.1017/9781009157926.001

IPCC, 2022: Summary for Policymakers [H.-O. Pértner, D.C. Roberts, E.S. Poloczanska, K.
Mintenbeck, M. Tignor, A. Alegria, M. Craig, 8. Langsdorf, S. Léschke, V. Méller, A. Okem (eds.)].
In: Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II
to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [H.-O. Pértner, D.C.
Roberts, M. Tignor, E.S. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegria, M. Craig, S. Langsdorf, S. Léschke,
V. Miller, A. Okem, B. Rama (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press. In Press.

Hernandez, N. M., Lucaiias, P. J., Mamador, C., & Panganiban, L. [2019]. Automated Information
Retrieval from Unstructured Documents Utilizing a Sequence of Smart Machine Learning Methods
within a Hybrid Cloud Container. EAGE Workshop on Big Data and Machine Learning for E&P
Efficiency 25-27 February

Hernandez, N.M. and Maver, K.M. [2021]. ED2K Initiative launched to support UN 2050 Net Zero
goals by reading the earth better, First Break, June 2021


