
A CASE STUDY OF UNDERSTANDING THE

BONAPARTE BASIN USING UNSTRUCTURED DATA
ANALYSIS WITH MACHINE LEARNING TECHNIQUES

ANN. Sazali!, N.M. Hernandez', F. Baillard', K.G. Maver!

' Traya Energies

Summary

As part of exploration and production the oil and gas industry produce substantial amounts of data
within different disciplines of which 80% are unstructured like reports, presentations, spreadsheets etc.
The value of technical work is reduced due to the lack of time available for analysis and critical
thinking and the under-utilization of the data. To assist geoscientist and engineers, Machine Learning
(ML) and Artificial Intelligence (AI) technologies are applied to process the unstructured data from
440 wells from the Bonaparte Basin in Australia making it possible to perform more accurate analysis
and make faster decisions.

Based on the play-based exploration pyramid concept, the time spent at the Basin Focus stage can be
reduced, and more time are available to focus on the other project stages. The explorationist will be
able to bring more value to the study.

It will be shown that potential issues encountered during exploration of the Bonaparte Basin can be
identified. Based on a quick look and gathering of all information it can be concluded that most of the
production in the Bonaparte Basin is from Jurassic and Triassic with observed net pay of 18-60m
thickness, porosity of 11-29% and saturation of 11-55% Sw.


A Case Study of Understanding the Bonaparte Basin using Unstructured Data Analysis with
Machine Learning Techniques

Introduction

As part of exploration and production the oil and gas industry produce substantial amounts of data
within different disciplines of which 80% are unstructured like reports, presentations, spreadsheets etc
and it is expected to grow exponentially. As a result, geoscientists and engineers spend 50 to 80% of
their time searching and assembling data and only 1 to 5% of the data is fully utilized. The value of
technical work is therefore reduced due to the lack of time available for analysis and critical thinking
and the under-utilization of the data. To assist geoscientist and engineers, Machine Learning (ML)
and Artificial Intelligence (AI) technologies are applied to process the unstructured data making it
possible to perform more accurate analysis and make faster decisions.

In this case study the area of interest covers Bonaparte Basin, which is located north-west of
the Australian continental margin (Figure 1). It joins the Money Shoal basin in the north-east and
the Browse Basin in the south-west. Furthermore, the Timor Trough defines the northern boundary.
The areal extent of the basin is approximately 270,000 sq. km. The objective of this study is to
understand and obtain meaningful insights into the Bonaparte Basin based on the substantial amount
of information available in previous studies, reports and presentations. The unstructured data of the
Bonaparte Basin have been ingested in a Knowledge Container through consecutive ML and AI
pipelines and analysed using big data analytics tools.

Java Sea

Consist of several structural elements :
@ Ashmore Platform © Malita Graben
© Vulcan Sub-Basin © Sahul Platform
© Londonderry High @® Flamingo High
© Petrel Sub-basin @ Flamingo Syncline
© Darwin Shelf ® Sahul Syncline
@ Calder Graben ® Nancar Trough
@ Troubadour Terrace  @)_ Laminaria High

Figure 1 Location of the Bonaparte Basin within the Australian continental margin (left) and 14
structural elements observed within the Bonaparte Basin (right).

Methodology

As of 2021, the Bonaparte Basin encompasses 440 wells representing 58 years of exploration history
summarized in over 270,000 pages of documents and in 250,000 images. It is estimated that billions of
dollars have been invested over the years to acquire and interprete the data, making it a substantial
source of information for new exploration activities.

The Play Based Exploration (PBE) approach is often used as a traditional framework to refine the
geoscientists’s understanding from a broad basin level to a narrow prospect focus (Lottaroli et al., 2016).
As a start such an approach often involves capturing the current state of knowledge with massive
background resources to understand and analyse the key features of the basin and the major risks
associated to it. Such information is primarily available in unstructured data, requiring geoscientist and
engineers to process and ingest the information before focusing on a specific play and prospect using
structured data. Therefore, we have modified the existing PBE pyramid to introduce an additional

————— ———— ——


dimension associated with data science identifying the different types of data available at different
stages, allowing us to better define the best suited ML/AI strategy for a given stage (Figure 2).

Prospect Specific chance

Prospect focus
= image, Map, Evaluate

STRUCTURED chance that a panicular prospect will
become
a discovery in case play works.

Play Focus

' Play Chance
1 Identity imits ofthe single play elements 1 the chance hat a parteuler play
unsracres: Al eee wean | gy mesnereamecercett
\ dbcare te 1 elements (e.g. reservoir, seal, source)
effectiveness of each element | of being present and effective over an

(Commmon Risk Segment Mapping)

@ Analyse play statistics. Seon Gey O44 a

Determination and description of the
Regional context and Basin
Framework
Understanding of the Petroleum
system(s)

Basin Focus

= Assess the possibility a play may
exists in a basin

Figure 2 Customized Play Based Exploration (PBE) pyramid with ML technology (Modified from
Lottaroli et al., 2016).

Focusing on the unstructured data associated with the Basin and Play Analysis, all the data from the
Bonaparte Basin have been processed through a succession of AI/ML automated pipeline such as
Natural Language Processing or Deep Convolutional Neural Network (Hernandez et al., 2019), (Figure
3). The sharable structured data is then further processed through deeper level of analytics to detect
trends and anomalies present within the data. Machine assistance is heavily used in repetitive tasks early
in the process during the processing of the data and up to 95% of the tasks will be performed by the
machine. This provides additional time for the specialist to focus on critical thinking and cognitive skills
to interpret the data.

MACHINE LEARNING PIPELINE ANALYTICS, GEOLOGICAL INSIGHTS

-inniogy an Early interpretation on
Geological environment

* Text Search Data are geospatially

Extracted image ea
+ “Imoges. ~~” Image Classification — > nae |, distributed on maps for
Deep Convolutional ee trends and anomalies
Unstructured pecker hom Giants
» Structured * Image Search
Data ee
a

|, Extracted | Metadata Extraction |, Document
Text and Tagging Tags

‘Notural tanguage Processing

._ Early trend can be observed

> Heat Mi in
ea MEe across the whole basin

._ Identify well analogues and

“HEE oe relationship between wells

MACHINE 4 on =

Af. 50.%5 . i 60% 0%

ML/Al sequence automated with Analytics tools for data display Human high-level interpretation
human in the loop for QC

Figure 3 Unstructured Big Data pipeline

In this case study, interpretation using the Big Data workflow was used to understand the exploration
history, how the basin developed, its petroleum system and the main issue of the dry wells occurrence
to avoid repeating the mistakes of the past and improve future decision making.



By analysing the data, five potential issues are identified i.e. (i) Discrepancies in Formation Tops, (ii)
Limited understanding of Lithology Distribution, (iii) Limited Mineral Composition Understanding,
(iv) Fluid Distribution, and (v) Pressure/Temperature Patterns. Each potential issue is tackled by
identifying trends and anomalies across the basin using images, tables and plots extracted from the
unstructured data corpus.

Results

As an example, the analysis of the (ii) Limited Understanding of Lithology Distribution, shown in
Figure 4, is performed using heatmaps. The heatmaps show the distribution of clastic and carbonates
across the Bonaparte Basin and identify patterns and anomalies present in the area. The result can be
supported by the stratigraphic chart where the carbonate environment occurs in the younger formation
from Cretaceous to Neogene period, whereas clastic environment is present in the older formations from
Triassic to Cretaceous.

Ne

PALEOGENE
eae

Ea

‘CRETACEOUS

$3233 3 3
JURASSIC

toy | Mee

Ting 5
wo

Basal transgressive snadstone EEEEEE Limestone

and marine shelf sand
Marine claystone and shale ES van

Moditied trom Frankowicz & McClay 2009

Figure 4 Lithology distribution on heatmaps (left) and corresponding stratigraphic chart (right).

The analysis of the (iii) Limited Mineral Composition Understanding, shown in Figure 5, utilizes the
thin section automatically extracted using ML classification over the full area and suggests that:

¢ Quartz overgrowth and kaolinite are quite common in Bonaparte Basin

e Mica mineral can be observed at the north-eastern part of the basin

e Highly corroded, skeletal feldspar has been extensively dissolved, which forms secondary
porosity, and can be observed in the northern part of the basin

e Some patchy siderites are also observed in the southern part of the basin

————— ———— ——


Figure 5 Thin section images distributed on a map across the Bonaparte Basin.

Conclusion

A regional understanding is critical and time consuming as it involves dealing with a very large data
volume. Within a project time frame, based on PBE pyramid, the time spent at the Basin Focus stage
can be reduced, and more time are available to focus on the other project stages. The explorationist will
be able to bring more value to the study.

ML applications have proven to be able to play a crucial part in order to organize large unstructured
data corpuses. This allows faster and accurate decision making within the fast-moving industry.

In this study, some potential issues encountered during exploration of the Bonaparte Basin can be
identified. Based on a quick look and gathering of all information it can be concluded that most of the
production in the Bonaparte Basin is from Jurassic and Triassic with observed net pay ~18-60m
thickness, porosity ~11-29% and saturation ~11-55% Sw.

References

Hernandez N., Lucafias P., Graciosa J.C., Mamador C., and Panganiban L. C. L, 2019: Automated
information retrieval from unstructured documents utilizing a sequence of smart machine learning
methods within a hybrid cloud container. EAGE Workshop on Big Data and Machine Learning for E&P
Efficiency 25 - 27 February.

Lottaroli F., Craig J., Cozzi A., 2016: Evaluating a vintage play fairway exercise using subsequent
exploration results: did it work? Petroleum Geoscience, Vol 24, no 2, p. 159-171.

Maver K.G., Hernandez N., Lucafias P., Graciosa J.C., Mamador C., Panganiban L.C.I., Yu C., and
Maver M.G., 2018: An automated information retrieval platform for unstructured well data smart
machine learning algorithms within a hybrid cloud container. EAGE/PESGB Workshop on Machine
Learning, 29 — 30 November.


