
VIENNA | AUSTRIA

Sand Production and Control Benchmarking through Unstructured Data Analysis with Machine
Learning in the North Sea

Introduction

Sand production has been serving as a bottleneck to the oil and gas industry, contributing to disruption
of daily production operations, casing deformation, erosion of well tubing, pipelines, and surface
equipment, expediting to significant non-productive time (NPT) costing millions of dollars in loss
annually. Conventional areal studies for sand production will only be limited to few wells and heavily
dependent on data availability, human-based interpretation, and time constraints. To administer a
holistic basin study for sand production comprising of hundreds of wells with conventional manual
method is considered complex and time consuming, hence sand mitigation best practices are typically
derived from localized reservoir and production engineering data only, and knowledge is organically
built through accumulated expert experience in the area over multiple years of operatorship. Information
and reports may be derived from millions of pages of legacy well reports, documentations, or files from
over 40 years ranging from digitized medium to hand-written reports in countless formats.

A sustainable strategy of data-driven basis shall be leveraged to address the knowledge and information
management issues utilizing the latest advancement of Machine Learning (ML) and data analytics to
maximize the potential of unstructured data. Utilizing the intuitive data-driven approach, the paper will
highlight the areal causation of sand production based on geological characteristics and the best
practices of sand control commenced by 8 operators in Norwegian Basins practically informative for
future exploration wells to be developed nearby current wells. The study first creates a relationship
between the causation of sand production versus the sand control practices implied and best practices
are derived from the practices of multi-wells.

Methodology

Unstructured data in nature is significantly sophisticated to be manually interpreted and skimmed
through by human-intervention. An intuitive approach embedded with Deep Convolutional Neural
Network (DCNN) for autonomous image recognition and Natural Language Processing (NLP) for texts
and entity processing and recognition has been a pioneering enterprise-scaled platform in managing
unstructured data (Hernandez et al., 2019). It will be capable to ingest “big data” for the case study
comprising of 70,000 files with 490,000 pages and 430,000 images inclusive of 361 wells over 5 basins
in Norway. 40 years of unstructured data for sand production case study is consolidated approximately
within 16 days of study period.

Well Summary Tab Word Cloud Detaled search Correlate findings with
Knowledge Graph

plots /images/maps/stratigraphic

Oo Generic Search Heat Map @& Lithology tab Image search module
plots

Figure 1 Data-driven case study research strategy for sand production in Norwegian Basins.



VIENNA | AUSTRIA

Step (1) is a generic deep search of the sand production scope across the whole corpus. Step (2) leads
to discovering all wells significant parameters based on the files search results within well summary
tab. Step (3) portrays an early insight of the general idea of the document with word cloud. Step (4) heat
map resembles the wells distribution in a GIS map based on colour density of corpus search frequency
mentioned in the documents. To uncover more questions along the research process and to obtain more
in-depth information, step (5) is conducted in an iterative manner. Step (6) is to relate the lithology
distribution by lithology count within each well document to the previous detailed search parameters.
Step (7) aims to find more representable images to support the case study through the automatically
classified images through DCNN in the reports. After all significant parameters are obtained, well-to-
well relationship is studied to get more details on further causation and best practices of sand production
management.

The features of this intuitive knowledge management platform transform voluminous unstructured data
into structured data that are ready to be consumed and utilised for production enhancement case study.
Four main ML analytical tools embedded in the platform are as presented below (Baillard et al.,2021):

e Expeditious and intelligent search module by keyword-basis searching through hundreds of
thousands of pages of texts and texts embedded inside images.

e Autonomous extraction of images from documents and image segregation into respective image
classes of tables, figures, well plots and maps with DCNN image detection algorithm.
Knowledge graph with contextual well name relationship portraying connectivity of ‘related
corpuses’ to understand well-to-well relationship as described in their respective document corpus.
Heat Map illustrates the density of keywords by colour gradient on wells based on the search results
on a map. Polygonal or square filter feature enable selective wells to be screened out for users
narrowed search interest.

Case Study: Preliminary Study on Sand Production and Developing Sand Control Benchmark of
Norwegian Basin with Unstructured Data

The study was conducted extensively throughout approximately 361 wells consuming 16 days of study
period covering the analysis and interpretation of sand production trends, causation and best practices
in Norwegian Basins. A total of 8 operators were participating in exploration phase of reservoirs
especially in Voring and Northern North Sea basins.

Voring Basin Wells

Figure 2 Reservoir Performance Tests (RFT) for Voring Basin Wells

Sand production was reported in 7 wells and most discoveries of sanding were reported during Drill-
stem Testing (DST) and reported in completion reports and drilling program reports as in Figure 2. A



VIENNA | AUSTRIA

few wells were reported to experience little to no sanding issues however pro
information in the scope of best practices and recommendations.

Upper part - clean sandstone, fina grained, wall sorted 6608/10-2
and friable

Lower part —-medium to coarse grained, moderately

Sorted, friside to tose grains.

Moderately sorted, fine to very fine grain size, 6507/84
predominantly friable except the tight zones with
hard cementation.

RaES ‘Sofft tertiasy clay stones wih sil and sand layers 640719-2
‘Sandstones, friable to very friable, moderately

ssoited, subrounded to rounded

“Traces of sands (+-1% at 5000 STB/tay rate) | meee |

Geologic Time Scale

Figure 3 Chronostratigraphic evaluation of Sand Prone Wells

Referring to Figure 3, chronostratigraphic reports denote sufficient reasoning of sand production
occurrence throughout Norwegian basins as most sanding issues are prone in younger formations or
tertiary aged formations from Upper Jurassic, Late Paleocene, Danian, Early Toracian, Sinemurian and
Upper Toracian. Cuttings and core samples obtained from different stratigraphy depths of sanding prone
formations; Tofte, Aldra, Froya and Top Heimdal were mostly described with friable, loosely grained,
traces of sands, soft tertiary claystone, little to no cementation and fine-grained characteristics
dominantly originating from sandstone, carbonate and claystone-sandstone mix lithology. Marginal
marine and deltaic depositional environments leads to less cementation and loosely grained deposited

sand characteristics.

Quality of MOT wireline samples wes
questioned due to plugging of the tool By
‘sand peoduction

= Sand detection monitor did not indieate
‘any sand was being produced with the
{uid stream and verified trough grind
‘outs which indicates only tracer of BSW.

+ Unconsolidated sands stringers in Utsira
formation caused an increase of ROP rates
upto 270 meters per hour without ary
§W08 as the zone is primarily lose,
unconsolidated.

+ Prepacked screens were installed across
feservoir interval to prevent sand
production fram unconsolidated formation

‘+ Formation stability test - increase rate flow
Sequence after the main buikdup, Sand
production and erosion is monitored by
SANDEC system - record impact of sand
grains on probe

+ Formation stability testis constraint by low
ermeabllty reservoir ~ not wanting to
flow the well approaching absolute open
flow

Northern North Sea Basin Wells
Sand failure test (high-rate test- gradual
crease to high rate for 6 hours)
No sand production observed

= Wel was flowed for 5000 stb/d for 24
ihours and choked back to 3960 stb/d when
sand production is above 1% for several
minutes (4/196 for S000 stb/d) - 141 psi
drawdown

+ Monitored with non-lntrusive sand
detection sensor as well as manual

samoling
+ Ifsandis not produced in signi
‘quantities, the flow rate will be reduced

primary sand contro! with downhole wire
rapped screen run in tec string.

Sand production monitored with non-
intrusive sand detection sensor as well as
mmanwal sampling

Rate should be reduced i sand production
>2.5% continues more than 15-20 minutes
BSEW samples should be taken’

at early phase of rate build-up and before
and ater rate cronges

Figure 4 Heat Map for sand production best practices — Voring Basin

Reservoir parameters analy:

is was conducted to observe the sanding occurrence trends with respect to

porosity, permeability, skin and perforation shots for each wells experiencing sand production issue.
Stimulated wells with negative skin value, significant high permeability and porosity values are



VIENNA | AUSTRIA

arbitrarily associated to sanding issues. However, a few wells do highlight these characteristics but no
or little sanding occurred, and assumptions were made that inter-grain cementation are intact or sanding
probably will occur soon in the later phases of the reservoir as sand production onset is distinct in each
well. Perforation design does not lead primarily towards sand production as comparison has been made
for wells with the same perforation shots with significantly different reservoir parameters for
comparative analysis. Pore pressure abnormalities attained from Knowledge Graph module possibly
causes sand production problems specifically reported in well 25/5-5 and 25/6-3 within Heimdal
formation interval, leading to depleted pressure gradient trends in both wells. Analysing the causation
of sanding creates an understanding in relation to the sand control practices conducted for each of the
wells. Wells describing sand production issues, sand control mitigation methods and other relatable
descriptions of sand production were intensively analysed as Figure 4 above.

Conclusion

Managing unstructured data into an intuitive structured data with embedded end-to-end ML
advanced technology made it possible to interpret, analyze and make decisions with regards to
handling “big data” and derive sand production causation and best practices across 490,000
pages of public documents inclusive of 361 wells and 2 Norwegian basins in total. The novel
approach serves as a holistic study of sand management focused on unstructured “big data”
which combines multiple digitalization techniques currently applied in the petroleum industry.
Maximizing the potential of underutilized unstructured data leads to opening of vast
opportunities for enhancement of production in existing oil and gas wells, and reduces
investment in the drilling of newer, more expensive wells, in alignment with a re-use, reduce,
up-cycle mentality, towards sustainable energy transition for the industry.

Acknowledgment

This paper utilizes the data from the Norwegian Petroleum Directorate (NPD) open dataset. Disclaimer
of those interpretations from the study are from investigation and analysis of the authors alone.

References

Acock, A. & ORourke, T. & Shirmboh, D. & Alexander, J. & Andersen, G. & Kaneko, T. &
Venkitaraman, A. & Lopez de Cardenas, Jorge & Nishi, M. & Numasawa, M. & Yoshioka, K. & Roy,
A. & Wilson, A. & Twynam, Allan. (2004). Practical approaches to sand management. Oilfield
Review. 16. 10-27.

Baillard, F., & Hernandez, N. (2021). A Case Study of Understand Bonaparte Basin using
Unstructured Data Analysis with Machine Learning Techniques. EAGE Annual.

Hernandez, M., & Baillard, F, (2019). An effective G&G exploration strategy inspired by a wolfpack.
Force workshop.

Hernandez, N., Lucafias, P., Graciosa, J., Mamador, C., & Panganiban, I. (2019). Automated
Information Retrieval from Unstructured Documents Utilizing a Sequence of Smart Machine
Learning. EAGE Workshop on Big Data and Machine Learning for E&P Efficiency 25 - 27 February.

Tiab, D. D., Erle C. (2012). Petrophysics - Theory and Practice of Measuring Reservoir Rock and
Fluid Transport Properties (3rd Edition) - 9.36 Porosity as Strength Indicator to Evaluate Sand
Production. Elsevier.

Kim, 8.H., Sharma, M. M., and Harvey J. F. (2011). A Predictive Model for Sand Production in
Poorly Consolidated Sands. International Petroleum Technology Conference. Doi:
https://doi.org/10.2523/IPTC-15087-MS.


