
VIENNA | AUSTRIA

Using Machine Learning-Based Data Factory to Unlock Mining in Australia for Environmental,
Social and Corporate Governance (ESG)

Introduction

The road to net zero requires a lot of raw materials from the mining industry. Renewable energy systems
for solar, hydro, and wind need to be built to support the transition. Among the many metals critical to
technology and infrastructure necessary for new energy, copper is highly sought after thanks to its
conductive efficiency making it an irreplaceable element of any electrical equipment. Therefore, it is
projected that by 2050, the demand for copper will reach more than 53 million metric tons. This is
“more than all the copper consumed in the world between 1900 and 2021”. Given the above, copper
price spikes, and copper supply challenges are to be expected (Bonakdarpour & Bailey, 2022). Hence,
it is crucial to optimize the way copper is mined in order to meet future demands, accelerate the energy
transition and execute the plans of stakeholders to achieve Environmental, Social and Corporate
Governance (ESG) targets.

Optimization of copper mining exploration and operations starts with the capability to easily make
decisions and gain insights using the organizations’ data. However, this data is often unstructured,
scattered, and unsearchable. To extract, manage and sustainably utilize all these unstructured data, a
digital data factory composed of an orchestration of Machine Learning (ML) pipelines, data tracking,
and monitoring services, has been implemented on a subset of data from the Geological Survey of
Queensland (GSQ) in Australia. Utilizing the ML-based Data factory approach, this paper highlights
how mining information from the GSQ can be analyzed, unlocked, and used in optimizing the various
stages of the copper mining operation such as exploration, mining operation, copper ore processing,
reclamation and safety, health, and environmental control.

Methodology

Unstructured data from the GSQ contains scientific reports, borehole completion reports, publications,
journals, mining datasets, map collections, and mining records. The documents are highly technical and
spread over decades of mining operations making manual human interpretation and data extraction
challenging. The dataset covers 62 years of mining operation in Queensland and has been ingested in
the data factory at a rate of 3,000 pages and 4,000 images per day through its scalable automated ML
pipeline and big data capabilities. The steps of the processing include uploading the data to the cloud,
audit of the data, text/image extraction, image classification, and table export capabilities as seen in
Figure 1. The features of this ML-based data factory transform voluminous unstructured data into
structured data that are readily accessible through a cloud-based application for text, image, and
knowledge search. The data factory’s features have applications that can be extended to all copper
mining stages.

eb Province Deposit
HON Qnsene
ittle Evas
sit

Search Table OCR Image classification Word Cloud

Figure 1 Transversal corpus search features of the digital data factory.
Seamless Search Tool

To have a firm grasp of the copper resource information covering the definitions, inferences,
indications, and compiled measurements, geologists and mining professionals involved in the



VIENNA | AUSTRIA

exploration stage of the copper mining projects would need to be able to gain new insights and search
through their unstructured data (OceanaGold Corporation, 2022). The ingestion and digestion process
makes it possible to obtain new knowledge and insights, which is very difficult to achieve from the
original unstructured data. The ingested data is run through a Machine Learning-based pipeline that
transforms the unstructured data into structured data with its elements made searchable (Mamador et
al., 2020). With the seamless search, geological, mineral and deposit information can be found
efficiently and fresh insights into the site mineralogy can be gained with relative ease (Maver et al.,
2021).

Copper mineral deposit models can be correlated to their appropriate locations on geological maps and
supported by visual evidence such as mineralogy descriptions in drill hole cores and geological maps
as displayed in Figure 2. Solid geological inferences can be made regarding the characteristics of the
copper ore deposit, which can then lead to feasible drilling and productive mining plans supported by
owned data.

ee iy pty

Figure 2 Findings from deep corpus search of copper resource models and new geological insights
across Queensland.

File, Domain and Image Tagging

File, domain, and image tagging are performed through the data factory. This allows for the
consolidation of unstructured data, breaking data silos across documents and disciplines, and making
all the relevant data during the copper mining operation accessible across organizations and contractors,
hence streamlining mining workflows and supporting cross-company collaboration (Maver et al., 2021).

An ongoing copper mining operation would continuously produce various figurative and imagery data
such as resources and machinery management, schedules, rainfall, land survey information, engineering
solutions, geology, and more. Some, if not all of these will be integrated or considered in the mining
plan or model (OceanaGold Corporation, 2022).

The continuous aggregation by domain experts and ingestion of unstructured data that happens during
this stage of operation are improved via machine learning processes and scaled suitably. This is
particularly useful to track, reassess, visualize, and evaluate the mining plans or mining models at
various copper mining stages, such as tracking the progress of specific sub-blocks at a particular time.
Information from various sources would be integrated or correlated with these mining plans or models
to support decision-making associated with the site as shown in Figure 3. This process facilitates not
only efficient and easy problem-solving conditions but supports planning processes and governance
structures to be data-based and able to respond to ESG opportunities, risks and challenges (Maver et
al., 2021).



VIENNA | AUSTRIA

TICK HILL
MINE

Figure 3 Important documents and varying information concerning the mining model at different
scales are accessible by various roles (mining engineers, operators, surveyors, geologists, etc.) across
the organization involved.

Table extraction

Engineering, geoscience, and even metallurgic processes at the copper processing plant produce a vast
wealth of tables and numerical data (OceanaGold Corporation, 2022). Classifying tables to a particular
image group is also tracked by the data factory. Optical character recognition (OCR) is used to identify
and locate individual and specific information which can be used in further analyses. By automatically
converting each table image to a .csv file, valuable information becomes easily available, searchable,
and aggregated across various mining operation stages or copper processing plant processes as shown
on Figure 4, Manual translation of the table to a .csv file can therefore be avoided, and information
tracked to the original location in the report.

para
INDICATED os oa | 96 96

wweenwed | oooe | 27 | a
Tom [ose [as fos fo |

Figure 4 Table image with numerical values such as tonnage and ore grades identified by the data
factory’s OCR and extracted for external documents.

Being able to extract numerical values from tables is valuable to help track mining information such as
ore grades, tonnage, production values, coordinates, rainfall, work hours, processing plant or laboratory
parameters.

Mapping of Similar Files and Word Cloud

A data factory contains multiple tools that facilitate rapid comprehension and understanding of the
context of the data. For example, the searchability of the elements in each document allows transverse
documents within the vast database with similar keywords to be grouped together through the search
results. The word cloud associated with each document also allows rapid comprehension of the whole
document briefly. Finding analogues, similarities, and historical issues is a problem that now has a
solution. In the case of safety, health, and environmental control, incidents, lost time injury (LTD, and
reports of investigation (RI) can be traced to specific documents or even specific pages in the original
reports,



VIENNA | AUSTRIA

Environmental, Social and Corporate Governance Targets in Mining

The data factory certainly allows the risks and opportunities related to sustainability to be recognized,
evaluated and managed under a holistic framework pertaining to environmental, social and governance
aspects. The data factory approach is an incentive that can add value and align the mining operation
with broader Environmental, Social and Corporate Governance (ESG) goals to limit environment
impact. The data-supported holistic ecosystem from this approach is positioned to enhance cost-benefit
assessment of the ESG throughout the mining cycle.

Conclusion

Managing unstructured data into structured data embedded with end-to-end ML/AI advanced
technology made it possible to explore, analyze and make fast decisions using big data. With this,
organizations involved in copper mining projects and more generally in the mining industry are able to
process and present new mining information and knowledge from the dataset. Tools within the data
factory such as deep search module, word cloud, table extraction, and image identification contribute
significantly to providing a comprehensive understanding across the full value chain for the copper
deposit models, mining plans, copper treatment processes, rehabilitation plans, and safety, health and
environmental trends. Hence, maximizing the capability of unstructured data has proved impactful in
terms of significantly reducing the consumption of research time and costs (Maver et al., 2021) and
align mining operations with global ESG limiting the impact on the environment.

Acknowledgment

This paper utilizes the data from the GSQ Open Data Portal database (geoscience.data.qld.gov.au). This
database is owned by the Queensland Government and is open for public access. However, the
interpretation and conclusion contained in this report are those of the authors alone.

References

Bonakdarpour, M. & Bailey, T.M. (2022) The future of copper — Will the looming supply gap short-
circuit the energy transition? S&P Global. JAS Markit.

Mamador, C., Aranda, J. O., Arif, N. E., Hernandez, N. M., & Baillard, F. (2020, September). A
geological regional case study for pressure, temperature, and salinity for the GoM using machine
learning technology on unstructured data. In EAGE/AAPG digital subsurface for Asia Pacific
Conference (Vol. 2020, No. 1, pp. 1-4). European Association of Geoscientists & Engineers.

Maver, K. G., Baillard, F., & Hernandez, N. M. (2021, May). Accelerating E&P Decisions by
Applying Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Analytics to Unstructured Data. In Digital Subsurface
Conference in Latin America (Vol. 2021, No. 1, pp. 1-5). European Association of Geoscientists &
Engineers.

Maver, K. G., Hernandez, N. M., Baillard, F., & Cooper, R. (2020). Processing of unstructured
geoscience and engineering information for instant access and extraction of new knowledge. First
Break, 38(6), 59-64.

OceanaGold Corporation (2022). The mining process. OceanaGold. Retrieved from
https://oceanagold.com/operation/macraes/the-mining-process/


