
VIENNA AUSTRIA

Double funnel approach for screening of potential CO2 storage opportunities in the Norwegian
Continental Shelf

Introduction

Carbon capture and storage (CCS) is a key waste management strategy for reducing carbon dioxide (CO2)
emissions and mitigating climate change. The Norwegian continental shelf has significant capacity for CCS,
as it has several depleted oil and gas fields that can be used for storage of CO2. The field of CCS has seen
significant growth in recent years, as the need to reduce carbon CO2 emissions becomes increasingly
urgent. However, despite the increasing number of studies on CCS, there remains a lack of consensus on
the most effective methods for accelerating and scaling up CCS projects.

In this study, the integration of Machine Learning (ML) whereby the reports from the Norwegian Petroleum
Directorate (NPD) are ingested into one platform creates potential cost-effective solution by screening
previous knowledge gathered for depleting oil and gas fields and significantly reduces the time of the
screening, the evaluation and the ranking of CCS prospects. We investigate the feasibility of such a study
on the Norwegian Continental Shelf by analyzing the geology and capacity of existing oil and gas fields.
The analysis is conducted on historical data from final well reports for 361 wells (NPD, 2023) which are
ptiorly ingested using Machine Learning (ML) and Artificial Intelligence (AI) by indexing and tagging
metadata from the documents, extracting, and classifying images and generating geological interpretable
output such as heat maps or knowledge graphs. Our research includes a detailed characterization and
interpretation of the subsurface geology, including the identification of potential storage formations, the
analysis of reservoir properties such as porosity and permeability and the evaluation of seal characteristics.
We also conducted a comprehensive assessment of the capacity for CO2 storage, considering factors such
as injection rate and pressure buildup.

Methodology

Depleting oil and gas fields in the Norwegian Continental Shelf with their massive amount of data being
collected over decades of development and production are often considered good candidates for CCS
opportunities. Unfortunately the vast amount of knowledge come with the challenges associated to the lack
of normalization of the data and the diversity of the different format and template utilized making it difficult
to utilize the full potential of such data without allocating significant manual work.

In our case study, Machine learning pipelines are used to classify, cluster, and extract insights from such
an unstructured data. Priorly trained and G&G domain specific natural language processing (NLP)
transformers are executed on the text to perform indexing, metadata tagging and topic modeling, when
Deep Convolutional Neural Network (DCNN) extract, classify and segment extracted images. Such an
approach has the advantage of significantly lessening manual human intervention allowing G&G experts
to focus on the interpretation of the data itself using a front end deployed interface (Baillard et al., 2019).
As seen in Figure 1 the data visualization and interpretation are performed through a suite of six analytical
tools: (1) summarizes the important attributes of the well automatically extracted from the document, (2)
aids in portraying the well data on a map and visualizes the lateral distribution of search queries, (3)
provides an in-depth search within all the corpus for the text and any tagged associated metadata using
NLP, (4) correlates wells between each other’s to understand and interpret the semantic structure of the
basin(5) searches the images extracted from DCNN into its respected geological categories, (6) quantifies
the frequency of different lithologies present from the different wells.



VIENNA AUSTRIA

Image search module 4
Deep-search module Correlate findings with oe Lithotogy tab
6 Oe, nevevnape tase i
se
z

Figure 1 Analytical tools used for the case study research strategy for CO2 storage screening

Such a set of tools provides powerful means for understanding and interpreting large and complex sets of
data. It can help to identify patterns, trends, and relationships that might not be immediately apparent from
raw data due to the segregation of information in separate files for each well. By narrowing down the scope
of focus on selected wells, the exclusion of non-relevant well and time frame reduction of the process can
be accomplished.

In this paper, we propose a new CCS screening workflow called Double Funnel Approach (DFA), seen on
Figure 2 which consists of a “data sweep” and a “data target”, The “data sweep” aims to reduce all findings
from all ingested data to key learnings and key wells over the area of interest, allowing to review and rank
the most suitable field candidates for potential CCS opportunities. The “data target” follows the “data
sweep” and focuses only on the field selected candidates and aims to refine and enhance the existing
unstructured data with seismic, logs, interpretation and geomodel data, During this exercise, redundant and
irrelevant data are removed through efficient automated version indexing and cross-correlation with the
unstructured data. Finally, the data is now ready for screening for CO2 injection capacity and monitoring
analysis.
Unstructured Data Interpretation

Key learnings
Key wells.

“Data Sweep” Key risks Target field for CO2
Key drivers

Basin Mapping | area storage

“Data Target”

Play Evaluation

Reservoir Properties |

Monitor Injection in

Seal Properties Depleting fields review

and ranking

Identify learning over Propagate learning
sedimentary basins over key depleting
fields

Figure 2 Proposed Double Funnel Approach for CCS Screening Studies
CCS “data sweep” use case offshore Norway

The ingestion of data for the case study comprises of 490,000 pages and 440,000 images, covering a total
of 361 wells within 5 basins in Norway consolidating 50 years of exploration, development, and production.
All these data has been retrieved from the Norwegian Petroleum Directorate (NPD). The “data sweep” of
the data was completed in 21 days which evaluated various hypothesis and converge on the key learnings,
key wells, key risks, and key drivers.



VIENNA AUSTRIA

Figure 3 shows the generated knowledge graph associated to the zone of interest. Knowledge graph is a
structured way to represent and organize knowledge in a way that is easily queried and traversed across all
the corpus of documents ingested. This makes it useful for a holistic interpretation of the wells present in
the area of interest, interpreting and ranking them based on their location and importance in the graph
respectively as “alpha” or geological analogue, “scouts”, “pack or “lone-spirit” wells. As observed, the
structure of the knowledge graph does indicate a non-homogeneous distribution with 7 different clusters
being identified. Each cluster is centered around key wells acting as key geological analogues (“alpha”
well) for the surrounded wells located within the cluster. “Scouts” wells define the unique critical paths
between adjacent clusters, allowing geologists to deeper understand the geology and exploration history of
the area of interest (Hernandez et al., 2019).

BEM ue

Figure 3 Knowledge graph with clusters of wells from the Norwegian dataset

Based on the recognized clusters, wells are further investigated by cross-correlating their respective post
drill conclusion, formation penetration and keywords search associated to reservoir properties, seal
characteristics or a specific search allowing a deeper dive in the corpus. An example of such full corpus
search for ‘porosity’ detected from the well final well reports, within text, images and tables identifying the
relevant values of the porosity and their associated formations. Auto-classified images can enhance the
analysis by providing detailed information about the textures, layers, and structural characteristics of the
rocks through different scales, from field scale with seismic stacks or isochrone map, to microscopic scale
with thin section images. Additionally, image analysis techniques such as pattern recognition can be used
to automatically extract features and classify rock formations.

In this example, the “data sweep” suggests suitable areas for CCS in the Norwegian Sea corresponding to
Heidrun and Marulk fields. The study highlights the potential of Ile and Garn formation within the Fangst
Group under the Heidrun Field. These intervals show good average depths for COQ2 storage for supercritical
storage, and are characterized by good porosity and permeability, with a significant net sand thickness. Seal
integrity has been confirmed and validated. The interval above Ile and Garn are currently producing, and
therefore has seismic and velocity data which allows precise CO2 injection monitoring through
microseismic. The upper Ile and Garn aquifers have good reservoirs in the southern part of the Froan Basin
which may indicate additional potential CCS storage in this area.



VIENNA AUSTRIA

6507/ ean 7 a Tomm Moderate Claystone Sandstone
(ile Fm)

Figure 4 Suneonine CO2 storage candidates based on lithology, average porosity, average permeability,
and seal characteristics.

Conclusion

The study showcases how a “Double Funnel Approach” through an ML data ingestion pipeline can be an
efficient screening tool to analyze, review and rank CCS potential using readily available unstructured data.
In this case, 490,000 pages of documents have been analyzed in 21 days to identify potential CCS
opportunities below Heidrun producing field, extended across the Froan basin. Additional analysis through
the “data target” may now be undertaken around Heidrun field on related wells, seismic and interpretation
data.

To conclude, such an analysis suggests the scalability and the cost effectiveness of the methodology for
rapidly addressing the requirements of new CCS capabilities to mitigate the impact of the Climate Change.

Acknowledgment

This paper utilizes the data from the Norwegian Petroleum Directorate (NPD) open dataset. Disclaimer of
those interpretations from the study are from investigation and analysis of the authors alone.

References

Baillard, F., & Hernandez, N. (2021). A Case Study of Understanding the Bonaparte Basin using
Unstructured Data Analysis with Machine Learning Techniques. EAGE Annual.

Hernandez, M., & Baillard, F, (2019). An effective G&G exploration strategy inspired by a wolfpack.
FORCE Workshop.

Norwegian Petroleum Directorate. (n.d.). 5 - The Norwegian Sea. Retrieved at January 20, 2023 from
https://www.npd.no/en/facts/publications/co2-atlases/co2-atlas-for-the-norwegian-continental-shelf/5-the-

norwegian-sea/

Norwegian Petroleum Directorate. (n.d.). 4 - The Norwegian North Sea. Retrieved at January 20, 2023
from https://www.npd.no/en/facts/publications/co2-atlases/co2-atlas-for-the-norwegian-continental-
shelf/4-the-norwegian-north-sea/


