Title: Supporting the UN 2050 Net Zero goals by reading the earth better
Author: Nina Marie Hernandez, Kim Gunn Maver, Charmyne Mamador
Tags: Climate Change, Data Mining


-----Page 1-----

SPECIAL TOPIC : GEOSCIENCE 8 : ENGINEERING IN THE ENERGY TRANSITION fb

TEA Arr AA rYrrrrrrr Arr A Arr rrrrr Arr rrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrr

C04 0 400 000000000000 00808060NONOKONONO NONONO KOK ONO KGG KKK KGG KKONKKKOKOKOKOKOCOKONOO

Supporting the UN 2050 Net Zero goals by reading

the earth better

Nina Marie Hernandez ! Kim Gunn Maver ! and Charmyne Mamador present the ED2K
initiative providing multivariate earth data to support UN climate change goals .

Introduction

Against the backdrop of the current global pandemic the UN
2050 net zero goals call for global greenhouse emissions to be cut
by half by 2030 and reach net zero no later than 2050 to achieve
the goal of limiting global warming to 1.5 Celsius above prein
dustrial levels . The EU has pledged to become the first carbon
neutral continent by 2050 and more than 110 other countries
have pledged carbon neutrality by this time . Several energy com
panies have laid out their mediumtolongterm plans towards
this objective which includes acquisition of renewables assets
and developing competitive technologies for carbon capture and
storage ( CCS ) and hydrogen production . Among the companies
that have set zeroemissions targets are BP Shell Total Repsol
Equinor and Petronas . This energy pivot will require significant
capital spending to reach the goals .

To determine the technical and economic feasibility of these
new energy technologies and at the same time achieve sustainable
development goals multivariate earth data both existing and
new are required and are key to making the right management
and investment decisions .

EarthDoc pointing to the future

To this end more than 39 years of conference proceedings and
publications are already available from EAGE through Earth
Doc which aggregates a wealth of subsurface information from
research institutions energy companies service companies
and dedicated professionals . The 70000 scientific publications
focus on conventional topics within geoscience and engineering
especially in relation to oil and gas extraction . This subsurface
information can be upcycled to provide highly valuable insights
for new energy technologies . The reuse of existing oil and
gas data reduces data acquisition costs which translate into a
reduction in research and development costs .

Through a collaboration between Iraya Energies and EAGE a
new database initiative has been launched with EarthDocs repos
itory of 70000 scientific publications being processed using the
latest in machine learning and artificial intelligence techniques
and initially available to institutional and corporate subscribers .
The whole data corpus is made instantly accessible and provides
new tools to search and retrieve the diversity of information that
one is looking for across any technical discipline .

Iraya Energies
Corresponding author Email : nmh @ irayaenergies.com
DOl : 10.399713652397.fb2021045

With Big Data analytics applied to the entire data corpus of
70000 scientific publications additional indepth and advanced
navigation options are now available .

To extract information on a large scale the ElasticDocs AI
pipeline is applied to the EarthDoc corpus . This pipeline consists
of a set of algorithms which are used to identify blockssegments
within the document corpus . Optical Character Recognition
( OCR ) is applied to the text segments to convert them into
processable text . A Deep Convolutional Neural Network ( DCNN )
algorithm pipeline classifies the images into various generic and
geological image classes including tables seismic map well
plots stratigraphic charts core thin sections image logs and
rose diagrams . Untagged images are generically categorized as
figures and remain accessible to the user .

The ingested documents are now available as structured
information for analysis which is possible in different ways :

Metadata extraction of relevant information such as locations
names etc .

Efficient inter and intrasearch of the global text corpus for
quantitative textual analysis of document contents to create
automated and standardized geoscience or engineering content
summary .

Automated heatmaps to visualize density of information
within a basin or country .

Image extraction of similar image classes for efficient identifi
cation of analogues duplicates and clusters .

Some key functionality that has a significant impact on utilizing
the scientific publications is that not only are images classified
according to type but it is possible to do a search on image
embedded text making the search capabilities far more advanced
than just a normal searchandfind option . The search results of
this database are exportable as .csv files making statistical work
and analysis instantly possible across data points .

Proprietary corporate data meets published
scientific knowledge .

Recognizing that energy companies hold valuable information in
their repositories accumulated throughout many decades of oper
ations the data kept internally can now be easily integrated with
published geoscience and engineering data . The combination of

FIRST BREAK VOLUME 39 JUNE 2021 63

-----Page 2-----

@ SPECIAL TOPIC : GEOSCIENCE # ENGINEERING IN THE ENERGY TRANSITION

Data 5ource Tray allows access of multiple databases
including public data . proprietary corporate information
and EarthDoc publications

F Search Reports

e
Fuba Databases @ maaaa G0 TO pace 188
Sulactad datasets o
Final Well Report Bas
nase paasa
Gas roRWATON VOLUME Fi AA









PROMETHEUS1 on .

Locarion oErtu INFO . orenaron
nao Prouerueus
tanruoe 128302

Final Well Report Basic Vol.2 of 2 100035511.pdf cas aGosa

Client : Kerr McGee NW Shelf ABEFAIIS Energy Pty Ltd Well : Prometheus1 Cylinder No : RCI
189769 transferred to ACS TX23135 Reservoir Pressure : 20472083 psla
180188F Sampling Depth : 1376m

won ting dhan km a deped ncr ix apo ur CO age bu ih poo mex kanil cic marco mith
fumoe CO umectna a walan me dc o pa paha cn at be coma 0 mael

MAP

KNOWLEDGE GRAPH

3G ss

vigw Report

sasin Bonaparre

LonGiruog ne.sesa

Figure 1 Data source tray in the new database allows
access to multiple databases including but not
limited to public data proprietary data and EarthDoc
corpus . Reference : Geoscience Australia NOPIMS .

MEMu

Pai

Dna
Ft 2058 Tatran NG . EE .

Gnjo0yon sg .
Scenarioxtt

E Figure 2 Earth readability tools are available in the
new database dashboard ( Rahim et al . 2012 ) .

@ Fiber Optic Technology for Reservoir Surveillance

Pal



@ Operational Excellence in Qatars First Successful V

@ Fiber Optic Sensing for Improved Welibore ...
N Integrated Approach to Optimize Material Selection .

@ Optimized Big Bote Gas Wells for .
outof the ...


@ Engineering Success into Wireline Operations in ...

@ New intelligent Completion Well Design For .

@ Massive Hydraulic Fracture Stimulation in South .

N .
N

@ Integrated App

N

Co

. @ Stratigraphic Architecture of the Latest Jurassic

@ Natural Fracture Interaction with Hydraulic fyagtpzep surassic to Early Barremisn Parhanata

@ Breaking Oil Recovery Limit in Malaysian .

database results in a twoway enrichment process between public
and private information . Scientific studies from peers in related
fields offer additional information that either validates internal
company studies or offer alternative technical perspectives from
industry experts .

In the Figure 1 example above we show how exploring
temperature information available in a Final Well Reports repos
itory that is commonly considered as proprietary corporate data
is combined with published EarthDoc contents . ( Data source :
NOPIMS )

64 FIRST BREAK VOLUME 39 JUNE 2021

@ PugLicaTIoNs Figure 3 Visualization of knowledge graph illustrates

related geological and engineering concepts .

Several Earth readability tools are deployed in ED2K to
amplify EarthDoc capabilities . This includes access to digital
textual content the ability to quality control OCR results and
read in multiple languages via machinetranslate . Word clouds are
simple context clues which provide a quick summary of content
of the articles .

The full ED2K corpus is geotagged to more than 800
geological basins around the world . The geotagging is one of the
most complex machine learning tasks in this implementation
because the scientific articles contain both location of the

-----Page 3-----

SPECIAL TOPIC : GEOSCIENCE 8 : ENGINEERING IN THE ENERGY TRANSITION @

geological area of interest as well as the location of confer
ences where the publications are presented . Often these two
reference locations are different and introduce ambiguity for the
system .

Another feature that is implemented is the knowledge graph
visualization . It illustrates the connectivity of related concepts
based on publication references . In the example above it shows
operational excellence optimization and engineering suc
cess within the same network ( Figure 3 ) . Similarly hydraulic
fracture stimulation natural fracture interaction and Jurassic
carbonates show connectivity . In theory a knowledge graph can
be built in multiple ways by the user .

Utilizing ED2K to reach the zeroemission goal

The advanced access in the new database makes possible a new
use of the highly valuable subsurface information and facilitates
crossdiscipline usage .

Many of the new crossfunction usages of the existing
scientific publication repository are geothermal energy hydrogen
energy CCS and windmill foundation derisking .

A query for carbon capture and storage generates an
information heat map captured in Figure 4 . The map shows the
geographical distribution of the resulting publications either
based on country or basin .

Figure 5 maps out the major carbon capture projects around
the world visavis needs requirement . Europe and US show high
activity in CCS initiatives which are driven by government poli
cy . Comparing Figure 4 and Figure 5 ( left ) it may be incidental
although not entirely surprising that where there is a significant
amount of data to aid technical and management decision mak
ing CCS implementations are also active .

MAP KNOWLEDGE GRAPH

Results Density

The new database contains climate change and greenhouse
gases industry discussion materials spanning over three decades .
Already between 1990 and 2000 the possibility of disposing
carbon dioxide ( CO ) is discussed in papers such as J. Leeb . W
( 1993 ) and Wildenborg F.B . et . al . ( 1996 ) in conjunction with
the use of CO for improved oil recovery methods ( IOR ) .

Between 2001 and 2010 the discussions tackled issues in
establishing a geological storage hub ( Espie 2000 ) and various
potential site feasibility studies ( Gregersen et . al 2000 ) costs
( Wildenborg et . al 2000 ) use of seismic monitoring ( Benson
2003 ) ( Gosselet et . al . 2006 ) pilot and numerical simulations
( Domitrovic et . al . 2005 ) ( Battistelli et.al 2005 ) reservoir
performance ( Broad et.al 2007 ) and improving facilities perfor
mance to reduce operating costs in CO and HS contaminated
fields ( Swatton et . al 2009 ) .

From 2011 up to the present with the advancements in
seismic methods reservoir modelling techniques and laboratory
experiments ( Bolourinejad 2013 ) many more complex analyses
on the subject of carbon storage were performed . Combined with
enhanced oil recovery experiments ( EOR ) the amount of data
modelling CO behavior underground has multiplied tenfold .

In areas where it is not possible to implement subsurface
carbon capture utilization strategies are discussed by Harsh A .
et . al ( 2014 ) on the industrial usage of CO including but not
limited to polymer processing and chemicals production .

For a deeper dive in the corpus we draw an arbitrary areal
polygon indicated by the yellow box in Figure 5 around South
East Asia . Our new database reveals some of the strategies
that have been identified by an operator to manage greenhouse
emissions in its operations in Malaysia ( Mehta et.al.2008 ) .
This includes among others ending continuous gas flaring

Figure 4 Indicative geolocation of global knowledge
about carbon capture and storage between 2008
to 2020 .

Figure 5 Location of major carbon capture projects
around the world ( left ) and the requirement index
based on fossil fuel production and consumption
( right ) . Reference : Global CCS Institute .

FIRST BREAK VOLUME 39 JUNE 2021 65

-----Page 4-----

@ SPECIAL TOPIC : GEOSCIENCE @ : ENGINEERING IN THE ENERGY TRANSITION

and minimizing gas venting improving energy efficiency in
the design of assets and production operations accounting for
the cost of emitting greenhouse gases in investment decisions
supporting development of CCS infrastructures and policy
advocacy .

The rich diversity of data available in the new database
are illustrated in Figures 6 and 7 . These include graphical
information of PVT analyses miscibility flow rates and time
lapse pressure profiles which are useful for reservoir simulation
studies focused on the interaction of reservoir rocks with CO
during injection . Also available are petrography data that makes
it easier to interpret reservoir modelling results by being able
to look at the structural fabric of the storage rocks down to
microscopic levels .

New energy from old data
With this datadriven strategy it will be possible to facilitate the
pivot to new energy from valuable existing data . No part of the
data is left unprocessed . It may be that not all relevant informa
tion will exist within the 70000 scientific publications but this
can be confirmed instantly saving valuable time and resources
doing data exploration . On the other hand if the information is
available it will be immediately accessible trackable and put
into context with other relevant information and geographically .
For example the geothermal gradient is a key parameter of
interest in relation to geothermal energy . The temperature data in

the new database has been acquired by energy companies mostly
for the purpose of understanding the hydrocarbon generation
window petrophysical interpretation and reservoir modelling
analyses . They can be relooked at for further exploratory geo
thermal applications . It currently excludes temperature data from
geothermal companies .

We are barely scratching the surface on the data and insights
available multiple data stories are waiting to be reimagined
reconnected and retold in the context of the future of energy .

Accelerating internal digitalization initiatives

All the elements of the new database are stored and structured
in a digital data warehouse . They will be optionally available
as an API link to be used for additional geological analysis
data analytics or machine learning experimentations . Already
in structured format they can be fed into additional natural lan
guage processing or image segmentation processing for inhouse
experimentation .

Opportunity for the energy geoscientists and
engineers of the future

While the energy industry has faced significant headwinds it is
now moving faster than ever towards new cleaner energy pro
duction . It is possible to see that multiple opportunities remain
as already pointed out by Raistrick ( 2008 ) and remain relevant in
2021 for the geoscientists and engineers who are looking at the

Figure 6 Experimental engineering data of CO
behaviours in enhanced oil recovery operations of
mature fields can be transferable to carbon storage
design and moniforing .

66 FIRST BREAK VOLUME 39 JUNE 2021

Figure 7 Combination of carbonate petrography data
and information extracted from well reports .

-----Page 5-----

SPECIAL TOPIC : GEOSCIENCE 8 : ENGINEERING IN THE ENERGY TRANSITION @

Results Density

Figure 8 Locations of relatively high geothermal gradient areas based on existing
corpus data acquired by oil and gas companies . Data excludes information from
geothermal companies .

Figure 9 Compiled graphical temperature information filtered by country basin or
an arbitrary polygon location . Reference : Geoscience Australia NOPIMS .

future of energy . Strong flexible technical skills will be needed
to explore for suitable carbon capture facilities assess their
storage containment and injectivity capacities . Meanwhile the
new energy industry will continue to gather integrate and analyse
empirical data whether it is on the reservoir subsurface or at
hydrocarbon or future hydrogen production facilities .

We have already seen a lot of data . It is up to us to use the
right tools to read the earth better and get a head start towards
new energy .

References

Global CCS Institute ( https : www.globalccsinstitute.com ) . CCS Facil
ities Database ( https : co2re.co ) Geoscience Australia NOPIMS
( http : www.ga.gov.aunopims ) .

Bolourinejad P. and Herber R. 2013 . Experimental and Modeling Study
of Salt Precipitation during Injection of CO2 Contaminated with H2S
into Depleted Gas Fields in Northeast Netherlands ( SPE164932 )
75th EAGE Conference a Exhibition incorporating SPE EUROPEC
2013 London UK .

Battistelli A. Giorgis T. and Marzorati D. 2005 . Modeling Halite Pre
cipitation around CO2 Injection Wells in Depleted Gas Reservoirs
67th EAGE Conference @ Exhibition Madrid Spain .

Broad J. Ab Majid M.N . Ariffin T. Hussain A. and Basher A.B .
2007 . Deposition of Asphaltenes during CO2 Injection and
Implications for EOS Description and Reservoir Performance IPTC
2007 : International Petroleum Technology Conference Dubai Unit
ed Arab Emirates .

Domitrovic D. Tuschl M. and Sunjerga S. 2005 . CO2 Pilot Injection
at Ivanic Oil Field Numerical Simulation IOR 2005 13th Euro
pean Symposium on Improved Oil Recovery Budapest Hungary .

Gosselet A.C. and Singh S. 2006 . Elastic Full Waveform Inversion
for CO2 Sequestration monitoring 1D Synthetic Data Investiga
tions68th EAGE Conference and Exhibition incorporating SPE
EUROPEC 2006

Gregersen U.N. Johannessen P. Kirby G. Chadwick A. and Holloway
S. 2000 . Regional Study of the Neogene Deposits in the Southern
Viking Graben Area a Site for Potential CO2 Storage62nd EAGE
Conference and Exhibition Special Session on CO2 Glasgow UK .

Harsh A.H. and Anne V.A . 2014 . Carbon Dioxide Capture Utilization
and Storage ( CCUS ) 76th EAGE Conference and Exhibition 2014
Amsterdam Netherlands .

Leeb W. 1993 . Case study of CO2 disposal in aquifers A solution
to reduce the greenhouse effect 55th EAEG Meeting Stavanger
Norway .

Mehta A. HjKip S. and Foo J . 2008 . Managing Greenhouse Gas
Emissions in Upstream Operations in a CarbonConstrained World
IPTC 2008 : International Petroleum Technology Conference Kuala
Lumpur Malaysia

Rahim M. Azran A . Press D. Lee K.H . Phuat C.T . Anis L .
Darman N. and Othman M. 2012 . An Integrated Reservoir Sim
ulationGeomechanical Study on Feasibility of CO2 Storage in M4
Carbonate Reservoir Malaysia IPTC 2012 : International Petroleum
Technology Conference Bangkok Thailand .

Raistrick M. 2008 . Carbon capture and storage projects to challenge
governments scientists and engineers First Break .

Wildenborg A.N . Breunese J.G.H.and van der Meer L. 1996 . Potential
of CO2disposal in deep reservoirs and aquifers of the Nether
lands58th EAGE Conference and Exhibition Netherlands .

Wildenborg A. Floris F.D . van Wees J. and Hendriks C. 2000 .
Costs of CO2 Sequestration by Underground Storage62nd EAGE
Conference and Exhibition Special Session on CO2 Glasgow
UK .

Swatton M.J.R . van SoestVercammen E. and Klein Nagelvoort R .
2009 . Innovation and Integration in LNG Technology Solutions
IPTC 2009 : International Petroleum Technology Conference Doha
Qatar .

FIRST BREAK VOLUME 39 JUNE 2021 67