Title: An Automated Information Retrieval Platform For Unstructured Well Data Utilizing Smart Machine Learning Algorithms Within A Hybrid Cloud Container
Author: N.M. Hernandez, P.J . Lucafias, J.C. Graciosa, C. Mamador, L. Caezar I. Panganiban, C. Yul, K.G . Maver, M.G . Maver
Tags: Machine Learning, Unstructured Data


-----Page 1-----

PES 463 EAGE

ML P17

N.M. Hernandez P.J . Lucafias J.C. Graciosa C. Mamador ! L. Caezar I. Panganiban ! C. Yul K.G .
Maver M.G . Maver
Iraya Energies KGM geoconsulting

Summary

There is a large amount of historic and valuable well information available stored either on paper and more
recently as digital documents and reports in the oil and gas industry especially by national data management
systems and oil companies . These technical documents contain valuable information from disciplines like
geoscience and engineering and are in general stored in a unstructured format . To extract and utilize all this well
data a machine learningenabled platform consisting of a carefully selected sequence of algorithms has been
developed as a hybrid cloud container that automatically reads and understands the technical documents with little
human supervision . The user can upload raw data to the platform which are stored on a private local server . The
machine learning algorithms are activated and implement the necessary processing and workflows . Structured
data is generated as output which are pushed through to a search engine that is accessible to the user in the cloud .
The aim of the platform is to ease the identification of important parts of the technical documents automatically
extract relevant information and visualize it for the user so they can easily do further analysis share it with
colleagues or agnostically port it to other platforms as input .

First EAGEPESGB Workshop on Machine Learning
2930 November 2018 London UK

-----Page 2-----

PES 463 EAGE

Introduction

There is a large amount of historic well information available stored either on paper and more recently
as digital documents and reports in the oil and gas industry . These technical documents contain
valuable information from diverse disciplines such as geology geophysics petrophysics reservoir
engineering drilling and other subject matters and are in general stored in a unstructured format .

Especially national data management systems and oil companies hosts these large amounts of very
valuable historical well data which contain information such as reservoir metadata images texts and
processed information such as lithology geology shows drilling risks etc . Due to the large volume
vintage variety and nonstandard formats extraction of valuable information which can be used as
input for further work is an arduous task as the manual nature of data mining is very timeconsuming .

To extract and utilize all this well data a machine learningenabled platform has been developed as a
hybrid cloud container that automatically reads and understands hundreds or thousands of technical
documents with little human supervision . The aim of the platform is to ease the identification of
important parts of the technical documents automatically extract relevant information and visualize it
for the user so they can easily do further analysis share it with colleagues or agnostically port it to
other platforms as input .

Methodology

The platform utilizes a hybrid data service architecture which leverages the 2tier strength of both
cloud and private servers . The hybrid architecture serves to :

Enhance the platforms security and data privacy by storing raw data locally
Increase data shareability in realtime by utilizing a cloud solution

Reduce data redundancy and increase data integrity among users

Provide a pragmatic solution to optimize data storage costs

The user can upload raw data to the platform which are stored on a private local server . The machine
learning algorithms are activated and implement the necessary processing and workflows . Structured
data is generated as output which are pushed through to a search engine that is accessible to the user
in the cloud ( Figure 1 ) .

KD
Obje

Raw Input Data
Storage Wu ct

Machine Learning
Algorithms

Figure 1 The hybrid architecture of platform ( ElasticDocs ) utilizing the 2tier strength of local and
cloud sever applications for data security integrity and shareability . Carefully selected machine
learning sequence for automated text and image analysis include : optical character recognition deep
convolutional neural network and image clustering .

First EAGEPESGB Workshop on Machine Learning
2930 November 2018 London UK

-----Page 3-----

PES 463 EAGE

The platform capitalizes on the machine learning algorithms that automatically process the
unstructured data into a condensed format in which only preselected information are stored . The
machine learning algorithms employs a unique sequence of separate steps which are setup to mimic
the human experience of processing unstructured documents .

Workflow

A Norwegian dataset consisting of 400 well reports ( 58000 pages ) and an Australian well database
consisting of 6000 pages have been used as training data for generating structured data .

For the unstructured data the first machine learning step is the digitization and conversion of .pdf or
.docx file formats into an editable format . This conversion uses Optical Character Recognition ( OCR )
where the machine identifies each character in the image .

After the documents are digitized important information has to be identified . This metadata extraction
and tagging utilizes Natural Language Processing ( NLP ) to tokenize each digitized text and identify
terms of significant value . Named Entity Recognition ( NER ) is then performed to create a model to
extract the metadata like well name basin permit operator well classification latitude longitude
spudding date kelly bushing etc .

For the images extracted by the digitization process a modified VGG16 neural network is used to
automatically classify tables charts stratigraphic chart images maps seismic core samples and
scanning electron microscope images within each document ( Simonyan ef a . 2014 )

For the visualization of the images an atDistributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding ( tSNE )
algorithm is used to quantify the similarity of each image which has been developed to visualize
highdimensional datasets and reveal clustering within the datasets ( van der Maaten ef al . 2008 ) .

The output from the machine learning sequence is then exposed to the users through the platform to
ease the work of identifying important information and perform analysis in a more efficient way . The
extracted information is outputted in an agnostic format which can be efficiently loaded to other
platforms or used as is i.e . X Y or LatitudeLongitude formation tops in csv or excel format
digitized maps as shapefile for loading into GIS software .

Discussion and conclusion

Wells provide key information about the subsurface in oil and gas exploration and production but at a
substantial cost . As this valuable information associated with a well is often stored as unstructured
data it is difficult to do further analysis or apply additional artificial intelligence processing to the
well database to enable geoscientists to gain new insights and extract new relationships .

The carefully selected sequence of machine learning algorithms in the workflow deals with these
large unstructured datasets is housed within a hybrid cloud platform to automatically extract relevant
information within technical documents and convert the unstructured data into a shareable structured
dataset .

References

Simonyan K. 4 Zisserman A . 2014 : Very Deep Convolutional Networks for Largescale Image
Recognition . arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556

van der Maaten L.J.P . 8 Hinton G.E . 2008 : Visualizing HighDimensional Data using tSNE .
Journal of Machine Learning Research 9 25762605 .

First EAGEPESGB Workshop on Machine Learning
2930 November 2018 London UK