Title: Sand Production and Control Benchmarking through Unstructured Data Analysis with Machine Learning in the North Sea
Author: Iraya Energies
Tags: Unstructured Data, Machine Learning


-----Page 1-----

EAGE ANNUAL

VIENNA AUSTRIA

Sand Production and Control Benchmarking through Unstructured Data Analysis with Machine
Learning in the North Sea

Introduction

Sand production has been serving as a bottleneck to the oil and gas industry contributing to disruption
of daily production operations casing deformation erosion of well tubing pipelines and surface
equipment expediting to significant nonproductive time ( NPT ) costing millions of dollars in loss
annually . Conventional areal studies for sand production will only be limited to few wells and heavily
dependent on data availability humanbased interpretation and time constraints . To administer a
holistic basin study for sand production comprising of hundreds of wells with conventional manual
method is considered complex and time consuming hence sand mitigation best practices are typically
derived from localized reservoir and production engineering data only and knowledge is organically
built through accumulated expert experience in the area over multiple years of operatorship . Information
and reports may be derived from millions of pages of legacy well reports documentations or files from
over 40 years ranging from digitized medium to handwritten reports in countless formats .

A sustainable strategy of datadriven basis shall be leveraged to address the knowledge and information
management issues utilizing the latest advancement of Machine Learning ( ML ) and data analytics to
maximize the potential of unstructured data . Utilizing the intuitive datadriven approach the paper will
highlight the areal causation of sand production based on geological characteristics and the best
practices of sand control commenced by 8 operators in Norwegian Basins practically informative for
future exploration wells to be developed nearby current wells . The study first creates a relationship
between the causation of sand production versus the sand control practices implied and best practices
are derived from the practices of multiwells .

Methodology

Unstructured data in nature is significantly sophisticated to be manually interpreted and skimmed
through by humanintervention . An intuitive approach embedded with Deep Convolutional Neural
Network ( DCNN ) for autonomous image recognition and Natural Language Processing ( NLP ) for texts
and entity processing and recognition has been a pioneering enterprisescaled platform in managing
unstructured data ( Hernandez et al . 2019 ) . It will be capable to ingest big data for the case study
comprising of 70000 files with 490000 pages and 430000 images inclusive of 361 wells over 5 basins
in Norway . 40 years of unstructured data for sand production case study is consolidated approximately
within 16 days of study period .

Correlate findings with
Knowledge Graph

P Image search module
Lithology tab o plotsimagesmapsstratigraphic
plots

F : 1

Figure 1 Datadriven case study research strategy for sand production in Norwegian Basins .

84t EAGE Amual Conference 4c Exhibition

-----Page 2-----

EAGE ANNUAL

VIENNA AUSTRIA

Step ( 1 ) is a generic deep search of the sand production scope across the whole corpus . Step ( 2 ) leads
to discovering all wells significant parameters based on the files search results within well summary
tab . Step ( 3 ) portrays an early insight of the general idea of the document with word cloud . Step ( 4 ) heat
map resembles the wells distribution in a GIS map based on colour density of corpus search frequency
mentioned in the documents . To uncover more questions along the research process and to obtain more
indepth information step ( 5 ) is conducted in an iterative manner . Step ( 6 ) is to relate the lithology
distribution by lithology count within each well document to the previous detailed search parameters .
Step ( 7 ) aims to find more representable images to support the case study through the automatically
classified images through DCNN in the reports . After all significant parameters are obtained wellto
well relationship is studied to get more details on further causation and best practices of sand production
management .

The features of this intuitive knowledge management platform transform voluminous unstructured data
into structured data that are ready to be consumed and utilised for production enhancement case study .
Four main ML analytical tools embedded in the platform are as presented below ( Baillard et al.2021 ) :

e Expeditious and intelligent search module by keywordbasis searching through hundreds of
thousands of pages of texts and texts embedded inside images .

e Autonomous extraction of images from documents and image segregation into respective image
classes of tables figures well plots and maps with DCNN image detection algorithm .

e Knowledge graph with contextual well name relationship portraying connectivity of related
corpuses to understand welltowell relationship as described in their respective document corpus .

e Heat Map illustrates the density of keywords by colour gradient on wells based on the search results
on a map . Polygonal or square filter feature enable selective wells to be screened out for users
narrowed search interest .

Case Study : Preliminary Study on Sand Production and Developing Sand Control Benchmark of
Norwegian Basin with Unstructured Data

The study was conducted extensively throughout approximately 361 wells consuming16 days of study
period covering the analysis and interpretation of sand production trends causation and best practices
in Norwegian Basins . A total of 8 operators were participating in exploration phase of reservoirs
especially in Voring and Northern North Sea basins .

Voring Basin Wells
o

So . e
Norwegtan

Figure 2 Reservoir Performance Tests ( RFT ) for Voring Basin Wells

Sand production was reported in 7 wells and most discoveries of sanding were reported during Drill
stem Testing ( DST ) and reported in completion reports and drilling program reports as in Figure 2 . A

84M EAGE Annual Conference 4x Exhibition

-----Page 3-----

EAGE ANNUAL

VIENNA AUSTRIA

few wells were reported to experience little to no sanding issues however providing adequate
information in the scope of best practices and recommendations .

Upper Marginal
Toarcian marine
deltaic

inner shelf

Sinemurian
Pleinsbachian
Early
Toarcian

Upper Jurassic

Paleocene
Danian

Top
Heimdal

Upper Jurassic

Tofte 2668.0
2719.5
rem ag

Top 2258
Heimdal 2267
Top 2391.4 NA
Heimdal
2398.4

2158.5

2169.5

Upper part clean sandstone fine grained well sorted
and friable

Lower part medium to coarse grained moderately
sorted friable to loose grains .

Moderately sorted fine to very fine grain size
predominantly friable except the tight zones with
hard cementation .

6608102

650781

Soft tertiary clay stones with silt and sand layers 640792

Sandstones friable to very friable moderately
sorted subrounded to rounded

25155

Traces of sands ( # 196 at 5000 STBday rate ) 2588 S

Geologic Time Scale

Figure 3 Chronostratigraphic evaluation of Sand Prone Wells

Referring to Figure 3 chronostratigraphic reports denote sufficient reasoning of sand production
occurrence throughout Norwegian basins as most sanding issues are prone in younger formations or
tertiary aged formations from Upper Jurassic Late Paleocene Danian Early Toracian Sinemurian and
Upper Toracian . Cuttings and core samples obtained from different stratigraphy depths of sanding prone
formations Tofte Aldra Froya and Top Heimdal were mostly described with friable loosely grained
traces of sands soft tertiary claystone little to no cementation and finegrained characteristics
dominantly originating from sandstone carbonate and claystonesandstone mix lithology . Marginal
marine and deltaic depositional environments leads to less cementation and loosely grained deposited

sand characteristics .

.. Quality of MDT wireline samples was
questioned due to plugging of the tool by
sand production

Sand detection monitor did not indicate
any sand was being produced with the
fluid stream and verified through grind
outs which indicates only traces of BSEW .

. Unconsolidated sands stringers in Utsira
formation caused an increase of ROP rates
up to 270 meters per hour without any
WOB as the zone is primarily loose
unconsolidated .

.. Prepacked screens were installed across
reservoir interval to prevent sand
production from unconsolidated formation

Formation stability test increase rate flow
sequence after the main buildup . Sand
production and erosion is monitored by
SANDEC system record impact of sand
grains on probe

.. Formation stability test is constraint by low
permeability reservoir not wanting to
flow the well approaching absolute open
flow

Northern North Sea Basin Wells

Legends

620792 N Well with sand production

620792 . N weu without sand production
Figure 4 Heat Map for sand production best practices Voring Basin

Sand failure test ( highrate test gradual
increase to high rate for 6 hours )
.. No sand production observed

Well was flowed for 5000 stbd for 24
hours and choked back to 3950 stbd when
sand production is above 196 for several
minutes ( 7196 for 5000 stbd ) 141 psi
drawdown

Monitored with nonintrusive sand
detection sensor as well as manual
sampling

.. Ifsandis not produced in significant
quantities the flow rate will be reduced

primary sand control with downhole wire
wrapped screen run in test string .

.. Sand production monitored with non
intrusive sand detection sensor as well as

manual sampling
. Rate should be reduced if sand production
32.596 continues more than 1520 minutes
.. BSEW samples should be taken frequently
at early phase of rate buildup and before
and after rate changes

Reservoir parameters analysis was conducted to observe the sanding occurrence trends with respect to
porosity permeability skin and perforation shots for each wells experiencing sand production issue .
Stimulated wells with negative skin value significant high permeability and porosity values are

84t EAGE Amual Conference 4c Exhibition

-----Page 4-----

EAGE ANNUAL

VIENNA AUSTRIA

arbitrarily associated to sanding issues . However a few wells do highlight these characteristics but no
or little sanding occurred and assumptions were made that intergrain cementation are intact or sanding
probably will occur soon in the later phases of the reservoir as sand production onset is distinct in each
well . Perforation design does not lead primarily towards sand production as comparison has been made
for wells with the same perforation shots with significantly different reservoir parameters for
comparative analysis . Pore pressure abnormalities attained from Knowledge Graph module possibly
causes sand production problems specifically reported in well 2555 and 2563 within Heimdal
formation interval leading to depleted pressure gradient trends in both wells . Analysing the causation
of sanding creates an understanding in relation to the sand control practices conducted for each of the
wells . Wells describing sand production issues sand control mitigation methods and other relatable
descriptions of sand production were intensively analysed as Figure 4 above .

Conclusion

Managing unstructured data into an intuitive structured data with embedded endtoend ML
advanced technology made it possible to interpret analyze and make decisions with regards to
handling big data and derive sand production causation and best practices across 490000
pages of public documents inclusive of 361 wells and 2 Norwegian basins in total . The novel
approach serves as a holistic study of sand management focused on unstructured big data
which combines multiple digitalization techniques currently applied in the petroleum industry .
Maximizing the potential of underutilized unstructured data leads to opening of vast
opportunities for enhancement of production in existing oil and gas wells and reduces
investment in the drilling of newer more expensive wells in alignment with a reuse reduce
upcycle mentality towards sustainable energy transition for the industry .

Acknowledgment

This paper utilizes the data from the Norwegian Petroleum Directorate ( NPD ) open dataset . Disclaimer
of those interpretations from the study are from investigation and analysis of the authors alone .

References

Acock A . 8 ORourke T. 8 Shirmboh D. @ Alexander J . 8 Andersen G. 8 Kaneko T. 8g
Venkitaraman A . 8 Lopez de Cardenas Jorge @ Nishi M. 8K Numasawa M. 8 Yoshioka K. @ Roy
A. g Wilson A . 8 Twynam Allan . ( 2004 ) . Practical approaches to sand management . Oilfield
Review . 16 . 1027 .

Baillard F. 84 Hernandez N. ( 2021 ) . A Case Study of Understand Bonaparte Basin using
Unstructured Data Analysis with Machine Learning Techniques . EAGE Annual .

Hernandez M. 8 Baillard F. ( 2019 ) . An effective GREG exploration strategy inspired by a wolfpack .
Force workshop .

Hernandez N. Lucafias P. Graciosa J. Mamador C. X4 Panganiban I . ( 2019 ) . Automated
Information Retrieval from Unstructured Documents Utilizing a Sequence of Smart Machine
Learning . EAGE Workshop on Big Data and Machine Learning for EXP Efficiency 25 27 February .

Tiab D. D. Erle C. ( 2012 ) . Petrophysics Theory and Practice of Measuring Reservoir Rock and
Fluid Transport Properties ( 3rd Edition ) 9.36 Porosity as Strength Indicator to Evaluate Sand
Production . Elsevier .

Kim S.H . Sharma M. M. and Harvey J. F. ( 2011 ) . A Predictive Model for Sand Production in

Poorly Consolidated Sands . International Petroleum Technology Conference . Doi :
https : doi.org10.2523IPTC15087MS .

84M EAGE Annual Conference 4x Exhibition