Title: 2021 A Case Study of Understanding the Bonaparte Basin using Unstructured Data Analysis with Machine Learning Techniques
Author: A.N.N . Sazali, N.M. Hernandez, F. Baillard, K.G . Maver
Tags: Unstructured Data, Data Analysis, Machine Learning


-----Page 1-----

EAGE ANNUAL

82ND CONFERENCE 8 EXHIBITION
AMSTERDAM THE NETHERLANDS

A CASE STUDY OF UNDERSTANDING THE

BONAPARTE BASIN USING UNSTRUCTURED DATA
ANALYSIS WITH MACHINE LEARNING TECHNIQUES

A.NIN . Sazali N.M. Hernandez F. Baillard K.G . Maver !

Iraya Energies

Summary

As part of exploration and production the oil and gas industry produce substantial amounts of data
within different disciplines of which 8046 are unstructured like reports presentations spreadsheets etc .
The value of technical work is reduced due to the lack of time available for analysis and critical
thinking and the underutilization of the data . To assist geoscientist and engineers Machine Learning
( ML ) and Artificial Intelligence ( AI ) technologies are applied to process the unstructured data from
440 wells from the Bonaparte Basin in Australia making it possible to perform more accurate analysis
and make faster decisions .

Based on the playbased exploration pyramid concept the time spent at the Basin Focus stage can be
reduced and more time are available to focus on the other project stages . The explorationist will be
able to bring more value to the study .

It will be shown that potential issues encountered during exploration of the Bonaparte Basin can be
identified . Based on a quick look and gathering of all information it can be concluded that most of the
production in the Bonaparte Basin is from Jurassic and Triassic with observed net pay of 1860m
thickness porosity of 112945 and saturation of 115576 Sw .

824 EAGE Amnual Conference 4z Exhibition

-----Page 2-----

EAGE ANNUAL

82ND CONFERENCE 8 : EXHIBITION
ARSTERCAN THE NETHERLANDS

A Case Study of Understanding the Bonaparte Basin using Unstructured Data Analysis with
Machine Learning Techniques

Introduction

As part of exploration and production the oil and gas industry produce substantial amounts of data
within different disciplines of which 8046 are unstructured like reports presentations spreadsheets etc
and it is expected to grow exponentially . As a result geoscientists and engineers spend 50 to 80945 of
their time searching and assembling data and only 1 to 5Y0 of the data is fully utilized . The value of
technical work is therefore reduced due to the lack of time available for analysis and critical thinking
and the underutilization of the data . To assist geoscientist and engineers Machine Learning ( ML )
and Artificial Intelligence ( AI ) technologies are applied to process the unstructured data making it
possible to perform more accurate analysis and make faster decisions .

In this case study the area of interest covers Bonaparte Basin which is located northwest of
the Australian continental margin ( Figure 1 ) . It joins the Money Shoal basin in the northeast and
the Browse Basin in the southwest . Furthermore the Timor Trough defines the northern boundary .
The areal extent of the basin is approximately 270000 sq . km . The objective of this study is to
understand and obtain meaningful insights into the Bonaparte Basin based on the substantial amount
of information available in previous studies reports and presentations . The unstructured data of the
Bonaparte Basin have been ingested in a Knowledge Container through consecutive ML and AI
pipelines and analysed using big data analytics tools .

Consist of several structural elements :
@ ) Ashmore Platform @ Malita Graben
@ Vulcan SubBasin @ sahul Platform
@ Londonderry High @ ) Flamingo High
@ Petrel Subbasin @ ) Flamingo Syncline
@ Darwin Shelf @ ) Sahul Syncline
( 6 ) Calder Graben @ Nancar Trough
@ ) Troubadour Terrace 14 ) Laminaria High

Figure 1 Location of the Bonaparte Basin within the Australian continental margin ( left ) and 14
structural elements observed within the Bonaparte Basin ( right ) .

Methodology

As of 2021 the Bonaparte Basin encompasses 440 wells representing 58 years of exploration history
summarized in over 270000 pages of documents and in 250000 images . It is estimated that billions of
dollars have been invested over the years to acquire and interprete the data making it a substantial
source of information for new exploration activities .

The Play Based Exploration ( PBE ) approach is often used as a traditional framework to refine the
geoscientistss understanding from a broad basin level to a narrow prospect focus ( Lottaroli et al . 2016 ) .
As a start such an approach often involves capturing the current state of knowledge with massive
background resources to understand and analyse the key features of the basin and the major risks
associated to it . Such information is primarily available in unstructured data requiring geoscientist and
engineers to process and ingest the information before focusing on a specific play and prospect using
structured data . Therefore we have modified the existing PBE pyramid to introduce an additional

82rd EAGE Amnual Conference 42 Exhibition

-----Page 3-----

EAGE ANNUAL

82ND CONFERENCE 8 EXHIBITION
AMSTERDAM THE NETHERLANDS

dimension associated with data science identifying the different types of data available at different
stages allowing us to better define the best suited MLAI strategy for a given stage ( Figure 2 ) .

Prospect Specific chance

Prospect focus

STRUCTU RED u Image Map Evaluate chance that a particular prospect will
Prospects become
a discovery in case play works .


Pa Play Focus Play Chance
S m Identity limits of the single play elements The chance that a particular play
works hence the chance of its
UNSTRUCTURED ai Cana bagi song In presenca ang elements ( e.g . reservoir seal source )
efteciiveness o ! each element of being present and effective over an
( Commmon Risk Segment Mapping ) area ( play se o )
m Analyse play statistics . 9

Determination and description of the
Regional context and Basin
Framework .
Understanding of the Petroleum
system ( s )

Basin Focus

u Assess the possibility a play may






i



( Play Fairway Mapping ) !





pi




i
exists in a basin




Figure 2 Customized Play Based Exploration ( PBE ) pyramid with ML technology ( Modified from
Lottaroli et al . 2016 ) .

Focusing on the unstructured data associated with the Basin and Play Analysis all the data from the
Bonaparte Basin have been processed through a succession of AIML automated pipeline such as
Natural Language Processing or Deep Convolutional Neural Network ( Hernandez et al . 2019 ) ( Figure
3 ) . The sharable structured data is then further processed through deeper level of analytics to detect
trends and anomalies present within the data . Machine assistance is heavily used in repetitive tasks early
in the process during the processing of the data and up to 9545 of the tasks will be performed by the
machine . This provides additional time for the specialist to focus on critical thinking and cognitive skills
to interpret the data .

MACHINE LEARNING PIPELINE ANALYTICS GEOLOGICAL INSIGHTS
iholcgy Goud Early interpretation on
Geological environment
Brad mags Yi Text Search Data are geospatially
PIE . Image Classification om g . distributed on maps for
B Deep Convolutional B ERRGB trends and anomalies
Unstructured Neural Network arabie observation
Data tr Structured ........ Image Search
Data
9 IR 5b Extracted Metadata Extraction Document Earl
ly trend can be observed
: o vor ooc or
o Ka Text and Tagging Tags POT .. Par ... HicatMap across the whole basin
mama Ba Natural Language Processing
3 A
Identify well analogues and
NOWISoBEorap relationship between wells
MACHINE 969 m
: . ! ! 6076 096

MLAI sequence automated with Analytics tools for data display Human highlevel interpretation
human in the loop for QC

HUMAN o
INTERVENTIUON 54 4096 O 10096

Figure 3 Unstructured Big Data pipeline

In this case study interpretation using the Big Data workflow was used to understand the exploration
history how the basin developed its petroleum system and the main issue of the dry wells occurrence
to avoid repeating the mistakes of the past and improve future decision making .

82rd EAGE Amnual Conference 42 Exhibition

-----Page 4-----

EAGE ANNUAL

82ND CONFERENCE 8 EXHIBITION
AMSTERDAM THE NETHERLANDS

By analysing the data five potential issues are identified i.e . ( 1 ) Discrepancies in Formation Tops ( i1 )
Limited understanding of Lithology Distribution ( i1 ) Limited Mineral Composition Understanding
( iv ) Fluid Distribution and ( v ) PressureTemperature Patterns . Each potential issue is tackled by
identifying trends and anomalies across the basin using images tables and plots extracted from the
unstructured data corpus .

Results

As an example the analysis of the ( 11 ) Limited Understanding of Lithology Distribution shown in
Figure 4 is performed using heatmaps . The heatmaps show the distribution of clastic and carbonates
across the Bonaparte Basin and identify patterns and anomalies present in the area . The result can be
supported by the stratigraphic chart where the carbonate environment occurs in the younger formation
from Cretaceous to Neogene period whereas clastic environment is present in the older formations from
Triassic to Cretaceous .

dation

Breakup

asal transgressive snadstone Limestone
AnG aharino Yheit sana Rin

4 Marine claystone and shale EE Mari

Modified from Frankowicz 8 : McClay 2009

Figure 4 Lithology distribution on heatmaps ( left ) and corresponding stratigraphic chart ( right ) .

The analysis of the ( iii ) Limited Mineral Composition Understanding shown in Figure 5 utilizes the
thin section automatically extracted using ML classification over the full area and suggests that :

e. Quartz overgrowth and kaolinite are quite common in Bonaparte Basin

e Mica mineral can be observed at the northeastern part of the basin

e Highly corroded skeletal feldspar has been extensively dissolved which forms secondary
porosity and can be observed in the northern part of the basin

e. Some patchy siderites are also observed in the southern part of the basin

82rd EAGE Amnual Conference 42 Exhibition

-----Page 5-----

EAGE ANNUAL

82ND CONFERENCE 8 EXHIBITION

@ 3898m ( Nome Fm . )

Figure 5 Thin section images distributed on a map across the Bonaparte Basin .
Conclusion

A regional understanding is critical and time consuming as it involves dealing with a very large data
volume . Within a project time frame based on PBE pyramid the time spent at the Basin Focus stage
can be reduced and more time are available to focus on the other project stages . The explorationist will
be able to bring more value to the study .

ML applications have proven to be able to play a crucial part in order to organize large unstructured
data corpuses . This allows faster and accurate decision making within the fastmoving industry .

In this study some potential issues encountered during exploration of the Bonaparte Basin can be
identified . Based on a quick look and gathering of all information it can be concluded that most of the
production in the Bonaparte Basin is from Jurassic and Triassic with observed net pay 1860m
thickness porosity 112946 and saturation 115546 Sw .

References

Hernandez N. Lucahas P. Graciosa J.C. Mamador C. and Panganiban L. C. I . 2019 : Automated
information retrieval from unstructured documents utilizing a sequence of smart machine learning
methods within a hybrid cloud container . EAGE Workshop on Big Data and Machine Learning for EXP
Efficiency 25 27 February .

Lottaroli F. Craig J. Cozzi A . 2016 : Evaluating a vintage play fairway exercise using subsequent
exploration results : did it work ? Petroleum Geoscience Vol 24 no 2 p. 159171 .

Maver K.G . Hernandez N. Lucafias P. Graciosa J.C. Mamador C. Panganiban L.C.I . Yu C. and
Maver M.G . 2018 : An automated information retrieval platform for unstructured well data smart
machine learning algorithms within a hybrid cloud container . EAGEPESGB Workshop on Machine
Learning 29 30 November .

82rd EAGE Amnual Conference 42 Exhibition